I have scarce time to inform you of my having escaped safe from the dreadful havoc we had on the ninth instance within six miles of the French fort where General Bradock and 1300 chosen men and officers were attacked by the French and Indians. And after a sharp bloody engagement of three thousand thirty five minutes our troops yielded ground chiefly owing to the consternation the Indian method of fighting through the British into and for the want of officers. Most of them being either killed or wounded By that time

July 9th 1755. Three empires hurried to the Ohio wilderness. And fight a battle in ox summer forest No one declares war until after this battle. But the conflict will become world wide, Known as the French and Indian War. And the Seven Years War.

Deep in the wilderness of America the French and British armies. As well as several Native American groups. Fight for an immediate prize. Control of the forks of the Ohio, a point of land where the Monongahela Allegheny and Ohio Rivers meet.

Today. Pittsburgh Pennsylvania marks the spot.

In 1755. It was the French wilderness outpost Fort Duquesne.

But the empires also fight for larger aims-to possess the entirety of the Ohio Country. From the Allegheny Mountains to the Mississippi River. This area encompasses sparkling rivers. And hundreds of miles of virgin forest.

It is the jewel of America.

What the French wanted was access and alliance. They were interested in keeping the Ohio River open to communication so that the route from Canada to the Mississippi Valley wouldn't be blocked. The English Wanted most of all. To acquire land in the area and also to exploit trade relations with the Indians who lived there. The Iroquois, or the Six Nations wanted to keep Both of the European empires out so that they could play one empire off against the other and serve their own interests. Let's be clear about this. The war was between France and England. And basically the Indians were the third party the Indians were the possessors of the land but the fight was over who was going to get the right to colonize the land. Of course there was a huge difference between the French and the British attitude toward the Indians. The British are really wanted the Indians property they were going to displace the Indians as opposed to the French who were Seeking to embrace them and their colonies and then their empire. The French people had a whole different idea towards the indigenous peoples. They were trying to build a nation state and so they saw people as human beings and tried to bring them into their fold.

The battle for Fort Duquesne known as Braddock's defeat shocks both the British and French empires. The British government under King George the Second had counted on General Edward bratticks ability to dislodge the French and secure the Ohio Country. The General's death. And the army's route now expose English settlements in Virginia and Pennsylvania to raids by their enemies.

The French under King Louis the Fifteenth. Had struggled to hold onto lands that were difficult to supply with troops and material. The French fine Braddock's defeat to be an unexpected reprieve. Now they enjoy the luxury of time to consolidate power. Braddock's defeat the British left the field. They left everything all their guns their ammunition everything red on the field. They provided the armaments for the resistance to the British for the rest of the war. So you had to say it was a tremendous victory for them and. Really unexpected Braddick expected to win the day. He thought that the European style of fighting with all that discipline was going to win over you know irregulars hiding behind trees. Yeltsin didn't think the Indians and the French could shoot straight. That turned out to be dead wrong.

Settlers from the British Isles have been streaming into the wilderness from the East Coast encroaching on Indian lands. Typical of these settlers is the Jemison family of central Pennsylvania. One of the Jemison children is a 15 year old girl named Mary.

My father being fond of rural life removed his family to the then frontier settlements of Pennsylvania to attractive, Excellent land lying on Marsh Creek. And for seven or eight years enjoyed the fruits of his industry. Our mansion was a little paradise. The morning of my childish happy days will ever stain fresh. In my remembrance.

The Jamison's and hundreds of other families living on the Virginia and Pennsylvania frontier. Now are vulnerable to French attack. With only ill trained militia to defend them.

French leaders seize the advantage. And take swift and decisive action. The petite gaire the little war the French call it is very economical. You only have to supply a few Raider's your Indian allies will join you. You can raise terror on the British colonial frontiers and rather than massing their force to strike you a blow, The More numerous British colonists will spread out and try to defend themselves. Attacks take place in Pennsylvania Maryland and Virginia. Raiding parties whose Fort Duquesne is their base. They probe east and south. Sometimes traveling Braddock's road over the mountains to threaten the anchor of British outposts in the Ohio Country. Fort Cumberland. And there are few experienced defenders ready to meet the challenge.

Williamsburg

the seat of Virginia military and political power.

In this time of enormous need. Virginia Governor Robert Dinwiddie in the House of Burgesses turned to a man they once scorned. A man of towering height with a volcanic temper. And a face marked by the effects of smallpox. A man who had sought to lead And Then Had had enough of leadership.

If it is in my power to avoid going to the Ohio again. I shall. But if the commanders pressed upon me by the general voice of the country. And offered upon such terms as cant be objected against. It would reflect eternal dishonor upon me to refuse it.

23 year old George Washington has already in his young carreer Assumed the role of ambassador in negotiations with the French.

Become an accessory to the murder of the French officers [french name]

Lost a major engagement to the French to the Great Meadows also known as Fort Necessity.

Served as an aide to General Braddick on the ill fated 1755 campaign. That cost Braddock his army. And his life. And survived a hail of bullets and Braddock's defeat so deadly. That according to legend. The French allied Indians stopped shooting at him. Believing that he simply could not be killed in battle. Braddock's defeat of course is a terrible trauma for Washington. He's the only one of Braddock's aides it's not wounded that day. He ride beside the general who he really respects and admirers. All during this terrible battle three hours or so of murderous fighting. And when it's over Braddick is mortally wounded. Washington is desperately trying to sort of hold things together. He's doing his best to organize and retreat from this battle and his world has literally been shattered. If anyone characterizes the wilderness war it is George Washington a man who has personally quested for. Not just the capture of Fort Duquesne. But also recognition of his value as a soldier. More than anything George Washington wishes to serve as an officer in the British Army. It is his Holy Grail. Washington. At 24 is a very different man than he will be when he's an older. Commander when he's in his 40s as a commander with the Continental Army. He's known for his steadiness. But in his 20s. He's a man who's not very steady at all. he's touchy. And he's anxious and he's eager to prove himself. And those are his faults. On the positive side. He's a very brave man. And he believes in himself. He's ambitious to prove himself. And that means he takes on assignments that are really greater than he can handle at the time. But to which he can rise.

Once again. Virginia officials in Williamsburg play on the vanity and ambition of young George Washington. They offer the one thing he cannot refuse the command of all Virginia troops a possible stepping stone to official British military rank. In the beginning of September 1755. Virginia commissions a new provincial regiment. And a new commander in chief Colonel George Washington George Washington as a native born Virginian. And property owner would undoubtedly have perceived himself. As a gentleman cuts above the bulk of his countrymen. Yet. He would have been perceived differently by officers from the old country. From that perspective George Washington would have been seen as a provincial very different in his social skills his background his worldliness from those who had come from the old country. Washington thinks of himself as British and he takes all his models for behaviour. From the British officers he meets in the course of the war and he deeply admires Edward Braddock. So how do they see him. Well they see him as an ambitious young colonial provincial who wants to be like them.

Washington must coordinate the defense of a chain of forts against lightning raids by French and Native American war parties from Fort Duquesne. These guerrillas. Are intent on spreading terror and driving all English colonists. East of the mountains.

Washington's frontier patrols can do little but react often much too late. And bury English dead.

Not an hour nay scarcely a minute passes. That does not produce fresh alarms and melancholy accounts. So that I am distract at what to do.

Washington travels to Boston New York and Philadelphia. In his new regimental uniform to bask in his fame and lobby for more funding and for his cherished commission as a British officer. Tension is heaped upon him for his exploits in the wilderness. But no commission is forthcoming. He returns to the frontier in the task of defending Virginia

his mission is beyond daunting.

It is impossible. He has far too few men to deal with these challenges. He has a regiment which is composed of a thousand men in it which in fact seldom has more than three or four hundred men fit for duty. They're poorly paid they're poorly equipped they're poorly clothed and they're very very difficult to discipline. So he's a man in 1756 and 1757 who has an astonishing set of responsibilities and an Extremely inadequate set of resources to learn to draw on the prolific Radian of various tribes ranging from the Abenaki raiding the New England front is to the Shawny in Delaware raiding the frontiers of Virginia and Pennsylvania. Had produced. A demonized image of the Indians in the eyes not only of the settlers but also in the eyes of those inhabitants of the coastal colonies who read newspapers describing the atrocities that the Indians perpetrated.

From spring until autumn The Killing Season French and Indian war parties maraud through English territory but the Native Americans are not interested in serving the French they are the Loosest of the allies. The Indians like many people around the world could only fight in-between times when he took care of their families. So he had the seasonal thing which was very common. I want to tell you among irregulars irregulars in every army wanted to go home when it was time to plant and they wanted to go home when it was time to harvest. And sometimes they had. There were other reasons they had to go home so there's always a tension with the irregulars and the regular army. And in this case most of the French allies were irregulars.

The English intend to destroy us and take our land. But the land is ours and not theirs. It is plain that you white people are the cause of this war. Why do not you when the French fight in the old country and on the sea. Why do you come to fight on our land. This makes everybody believe you want to take the land from us by force and settle it.

the three empires fight a pitched battle in the north at Lake George where in Sir William Johnson's colonial forces defeat a larger French army. Meanwhile in the south forts and settlements in the middle Atlantic colonies fall one after another. Militia and settlers are killed and Scouts Are taken prisoner.

Children are incorporated into the tribes to replace Warriors lost in battle.

French Governor General VodROI. Can scarcely believe how completely his fortunes have changed. How easily his forces control the frontier. The news from [fode Lukan and Bellary] here is very favorable. All forces have laid waste to the Indians the good out of Pennsylvania Virginia and Maryland. We learned that the suffering Old English colonies could not be with. The strategy of the Petite Gaer is working. Pennsylvania Virginia and the more southern colonies instead of massing for a blow at Fort Duquesne are now spread out in a panic trying to defend their own frontiers. I can take any fort that will catch fire. And I will make peace with the English when they teach me to make gunpowder. On August 2nd 1756 a band of Frenchmen and Native Americans led by the Delaware chief Captain Jacobs and by French Captain Louis [Koorlongtobea]. Hero in the defeat of Washington at Great Meadows. Attack and capture Fort Granville on the junior river. Acting Commander Lieutenant Edward Armstrong has killed. Another soldier is tortured to death. And the fort's women and children are taken prisoner. A month later. Edward Armstrong's brother Colonel John Armstrong. Leads a force of Pennsylvania militia and backwoodsman over the Allegheny Mountains in a raid on the Delaware stronghold at Katanning. Home base of Captain Jacob's.

Armstrong attacks at dawn.

An hour later Jacobs and many of his band lie dead. Armstrong liberates 11 prisoners and provides for the besieged English colonies. One of few victories in two years of frontier war.

With several colonies in peril a new leader the Earl of Loudon arrives in New York to assume command of all forces in North America an assignment once given to Washington's former mentor general Braddick. Washington attempts to engraciate himself to Loudon with a letter of introduction. We the officers of the Virginia Regiment beg lead to congratulate your lordship on your safe arrival in America and to express the deep sense we have of his Majesty's great wisdom and paternal care for his colonies in sending your Lordship to their protection at this critical juncture. But Loudan will not soon answer. On August 14 a new French commander. The Marquis de Mongkol attacks and captures the British fort Oswego on Lake Ontario. The war is going badly for the British on all fronts and Loudon could not be less interested in the serenades of a Virginia provincial officer. But for months Washington pursues with Loudon the coveted King's commission. When this effort proves futile Washington takes up a cause that will become a central theme of the American Revolution 20 years later. We cannot conceive that being American should deprive us of the benefits of British subjects by apprehend. It is the service done not the service engaged in that merits reward. And there is as equitable a right to expect something for three years hard and bloody service as for ten splinted Sir James etc. where real service are a field of battle never was seen. Washington's idea about the Virginia Regiment being adopted into the British Army is probably not quite as unlikely as it sounds. There is a tradition in the British military. Called raising for rain. And what that meant was that you could enlist list a certain number of men. Say a regimental sized organization. You could command it you could be given the rank to command those men. And Washington could plausibly claim to have raised a regiment of men in Virginia. And he could certain to have trained them. He could claim a good deal more experience in frontier war than almost any Anglo American officer in the colonies and so he had a plausible claim to make. For a colonel seat in the British Army. What he didn't have. Was.

A chance to do it. He didn't have a social credentials it took to be a British officer and he certainly didn't have any notion of the real character of advancement in the British army. Meanwhile French and Indian raids are devastating Pennsylvania pushing as far east as redding. Suddenly Philadelphia's threatened. Among those rushing to its defense is 51 year old Benjamin Franklin who personally raises troops and leads missions to rescue those in peril. He proves in this crisis to be a natural born leader. You are immediately to raise and take in to pay for one month a company of foot consisting of twenty four men. You are to keep a constant regular watch with your company every night. You are likewise once at least in every everyday to send out a scout to arrange some miles round the town. To examine all the thickets and places capable of concealing parties and the enemy.

When the French forces attack. Franklin leads rescue missions buries victims of the terror war and finds himself appointed head of the militia for Philadelphia. It is a grim time that hardens men like Franklin. And George Washington. Who suffers a 1757 that matches the previous year for its futility in fighting an enemy bent on spreading terror and driving out English settlers. Raiding parties kill Virginia troops. Within sight of Washington's headquarters at Fort Loudon in Winchester Virginia. They are the most skillful of enemies. No troops in the universe can guard against that cunning and wiles of Indians. No one can tell where they will fall to the mischiefs done. Then it is in vain to pursue. some of the nations. Had a long tradition not unlike the Spartans of ancient Greece where the boy children were raised to be fighters. From the time they were able to walk. They were beginning to learn martial arts. They had to be hunters in any case so they knew about the co-operative culture of hunting with groups  all of that applied itself very well on the battlefield the battlefield meaning that they actually did go into the battlefield for the most time. When you're fighting with Indians the Indians are not standing in lines fighting back at you they were they were acting like hunters they were trying to protect themselves they didn't like to take big losses. And when you were in the woods you were in their country. But as raiding parties carry out their grim work on the frontier to Virginia and Pennsylvania. As English colonials under the command of Washington and others scrambled to counter these attacks. Events an ocean away will gradually change the fortunes of all three empires. In December 1756 British prestige across the globe was at low ebb in India. The key post of Calcutta had been taken by a native ruler. Not only that but those British subjects have been captured on that occasion had been put into a small cell as a result of which many of them smothered to death. This was a notorious black hole of Calcutta. In the Mediterranean. The key British post of Menorca. Was captured by a French naval squadron and army. Which was seen as a damaging blow to British prestige. In fact the admiral who had failed to relieve the island was himself tried executed by firing squad as Voltaire observed the English need to execute an admiral now and again to encourage the others. But. From America there was more bad news. The key post of UsVago was captured by a French and Indian Army under the command of the Marquis de Montcalm. The war in America has now spread. England and Prussia form an alliance against France and Austria.

In London. The pressures of world war force out the old government. And placed in power an eloquent speaker and brilliant politician. William. Pitt. William Pitt was a man who had extraordinary oratory skills and he was a man who had. An extraordinary sense of his own importance. He literally believed that he was and of his destiny. So in that sense he had the ability that Winston Churchill had in the second world war to give people a notion of British destiny. And that's really what made him so popular with the colonists as well as ordinary English people. Because there is nothing the colonists wanted more in the belief that they too. Were British. And that they too had a role in the creation of this enormously powerful empire. back in America. The Marquis de Montcalm. Captures Fort William Henry in New York in a watershed event in the war noncoms allies. OTTAWA Ojibwa Chippewa and Potawatomi warriors. Attacked the surrendered army in order to claim the spoils of war. And massacre more than 180 British subjects. Hundreds more are captured or flee into the forest before order was restored. There is a public misconception that the Indians were somehow more brutal and savage than the other participants in the war. Any really honest reading of it will show you that there were no more brutal. Or less brutal than the other party the most famous example was the massacre of. The Eglise at Fort William Henry that one comes down to us in a fictional book The Last of the mohicans but the incident did happen. The brutal wilderness war drags on. Touching thousands of lives in even the quietest places. On April 5th 1758. A raiding party of French soldiers and Shawnees attacked the cabin of the Jemison family in south central Pennsylvania. They killed one man and take six members of the Jimerson family and three neighboring children prisoner. Among the captives is mary Jemison.

The night was spent in gloomy foreboding. What the result of our captivity would be. It was out of our power to determine or even imagine. The anxiety of our minds drove sleep from our eyelids and it was with a dreadful hold and painful impatience. That we waited for the morning. To determine our fate. The following day members of the raiding party learned they are being hunted by the English. in Camp that evening. Mary and two boys are led away. They are thought to be the most valuable of the prisoners. The Raiders know they will have to travel hard and fast. So they kill the remaining seven prisoners. Including Mary's parents. MARY Jemison is taken to Fort Duquesne. Then on to logs town. Where she is adopted by two Seneca women. To replace a warrior who had been killed by Washington's troops.

At night we arrived at a small Seneca Indian town. At the mouth of a small river that was called by the Indians in the Seneca language. She Nanji. About 18 miles from the fort. With two women to whom I belonged resided there we landed. And the Indians went on. Which was the last I ever saw of the raiding party. Mary Jemison is adopted into the Seneca tribe. One of hundreds of young captives of European descent to be drafted. By Native American tribes to replace warriors killed in the white men's war. Mary Jemison probably would have been taught by these two women to kind of be within that society. And so. Taking on a new identity would have required some training. And so how to be an indigenous woman. Seneca woman would have meant that she would have to understand the practices the rituals the songs and it wouldn't be done overnight. It would be something that would require probably a number of years. JEMISON incident is one of many such acts on the English frontier in Virginia. Washington orders the abandonment of all but seven forks giving raiding parties free rein.

There is little left for French forces to plunder. All our parties have carried terror among our enemies to opponents and the settlements of the English in Pennsylvania Maryland and Virginia are dependent. the settlers have retreated to the city or into the forest.

Enough is enough for Prime Minister William Pitt who decides to replace the Earl of Loudon. Pitt will now change the harsh policy toward American Colonials instituted by the late General Braddick. No longer second class British subjects. Pitt must depend on Americans like George Washington as valued allies in the quest to rid North America of a French presence.

Pit issues a new policy of reliance upon Americans. The result. Is Stunning. Volunteers swell in Washington's Virginia Regiment and spill over into a hastily assembled second Virginia Regiment. Suddenly the Virginians and Pennsylvanians are eager to prove what Americans can do in battle. After Pitt had come to power. It was realized that the only way to destroy French power in North America was to make simultaneous attacks on several fronts in 1758 more men more money than ever before was allocated to the North American theater of operations. The strategy if visaged three thrusts. The first to be commanded by the commander in chief in North America. Major General James Abercrombie involved a strike at the Champlain Valley from Lake George towards the French post of carry on Fort Ticonderoga. And Fort Sam Frederick Crownpoint.

A second operation commanded by General Geoffrey AmHurst was to involve a large naval force and a large army and that was intended to capture the key French fortress of Louisburg on Cape Breton and it possible to push on and assault Quebec. A third and complementary strategy involved an expedition sent into the Ohio Valley commanded by Brigadier General John Forte's that objective was to take Fort Duquesne and thereby to succeed where Braddock had so conspicuously failed in 1755. Acting Brigadier General John Forbes will lead a new march on Fort Duquesne. Forbes is a Scotsman 50 years old. He has seen action in Europe and risen through the ranks from humble beginnings a thoughtful leader keenly aware of his men his allies and the country around him. He is nothing like General Edward Braddock. Brigadier General Forbes was remarkable. In that he was perhaps better trained medically than any of the other major military figures in the British Army at the time. He had a medical training and apparently was aimed at a medical vocation as a young man. He entered the Army as a regimental surgeon's mates so he had that experience that dimension to him and it does seem to show in his expedition in 1758. General Forbes is ill troubled by dysentery that will not abate. He must rely on his second in command to operate the campaign in the field. Lieutenant Colonel Henry bouquet. Commander of a battalion of the 16th regiment. The Royal Americans. Bouquets a 39 year old soldier of fortune from Switzerland. Possessed of a brilliant mind. As well as a personality that can charm Americans. Colonel Henry of the Royal Americans who was extraordinarily competent and probably was. All in. All. The best officer in the British service during the French and Indian War. Bouquet is not however optimistic about what he knows of the colonial Americans particularly the Pennsylvanians. As the Forbes campaign is about to commence. Do not overlook the fact that no one in this country. Can be relied upon. At all times. Private interests outweighed the general welfare. Wrangling over supplies between British officers and stubborn Pennsylvanians continues through the summer. Forbes In a sense lost more to political considerations and to planning considerations than did Braddick. Braddick at least. Despite various delays was able to march his men out of Fort Cumberland about Khune 10th Forbes was much more delayed. He didn't finally get his march going until the very end of summer.

By now the weather has become unsettled. And the mountain pass is more treacherous. It will be a difficult campaign.

The father I go away from the settlements the more I see that this expedition which is believed so easy is full of almost insurmountable difficulties. If obliged to open all the roads we shall march like tortoises very slowly and carry everything on our backs. I'm told that Braddock's army ran three days without finding grass for the horses which made them unfit to carry provisions and he would have been likely to die of hunger if he had beat the enemy. Problems in dealing with the colonials mount for Forbes and bouquet just as they had for Braddick. The Virginian's including Washington urged the British army to march over Braddock's old road from Fort Cumberland to Fort Duquesne. The faster course because the way is already open

but much of Forbes army is already on the march. Through Pennsylvania not Virginia. The Virginians and Pennsylvanians employed the most intelligent Indians who in many years hunting declared the path leading from Wills Creek was infinitely preferable to any that could be made at any other place. In 1754 the troops. I had the honor to command greatly repaired it and in 1755 it was widened and completed by General Braddick. Consequently a road that has been so long opened must be better than a new one.

WASHINGTON steadfastly believes in the Virginia road he had helped to build. The road that he used to lead his first army against Fort Duquesne. The road that he had buried general Braddock's body under three days after the Battle of the Monongahela. In addition if the British Army Captures Fort Duquesne the Military Road would become a commercial road. Braddock's road cuts through Virginia and Washington is tied to Virginians who will see the value of their land skyrocket.

If Colonel bouquet succeeds in this point with the general. All is Lost all is lost by heavens. Our enterprise ruined and we stopped at the Laurel Hill this winter. JOHN FORBES And bouquet thought that Washington was acting out of pure self-interest in advocating the road from Fort Cumberland to Fort Duquesne that followed the trace of the old Braddick road. Washington however had another view of it. He believed that the campaigns stood a better chance of succeeding if it used a road that was already proved.

And not a road that would have to be carved out of the most forbidding terrain in North America to reach its goal. And his indignation at being accused of being a self interested party I think is genuine

what Washington didn't value and what ultimately decided the case was Grass because Braddick truth had much less access to fodder than the brutal Forbes took. And of course there were hundreds and hundreds thousands of animals that had to be fed  In order to haul the supplies the artillery necessary to make the campaign's success Forbes Army carves the road west across Pennsylvania. Building fortified camps every 40 miles along the way. They established fort Bedford east of Laurel the last mountain range and then a fortified camp at [Moil hadda] creek west of the mountains. Whereas Braddick had alienated Indian allies. Forbes recruits Cherokee and Kataba warriors from the south to scout for his army. As they move. The British Army builds what bouquet describes as an infernal road. Through the terrain that Forbes refers to as impenetrable almost to any human thing. They work desperately as autumn approaches threatening to freeze out the campaign before it reaches its goal. Although the work goes slow. Forbes enjoys a measure of satisfaction in his report to Prime Minister Pitt. The enemy never suspected by attempting such a road until very late there having been all along securing the strong passes and folds of the river upon general Braddock's route.

The French are now pressed on all fronts to the North Mone Combe defeats the British at Fort Ticonderoga but a second British Army Captures the French stronghold of Louis Borg. The great weakness in the French position here in the West has always been lack of supplies. Even if we had more soldiers more militia men to send even if we could entice more Indian warriors to join us. We can only send so much food here when louisborg falls and there is the prospect of no supplies arriving next year. The French situation becomes critical. Compounding the problems of the French leader. Is a peace conference held between Pennsylvania officials and many of the region's Indian leaders. And a missionary Christian Frederick post also spreads a message of peace and brotherhood to the Ohio Indians on behalf of Pennsylvania. In the very shadow of Fort Duquesne. He holds successful meetings with Indians who have not been treated well by the undersupplied friend. We long for that peace and friendship we have formerly. When you have everywhere agreed together on this peace and friendship. Then you will be pleased to send the Great Peace Bell to us at Allegheny. Now. Brethren. Let the King of England know what our mind is as soon as possibly you can. As the war. Dragged on the Indians became less and less happy. With the French. And it was partly because the French in North America were well supplied and they didn't have a lot of money. The Indians always practiced a kind of pragmatism. Which is to say that they they did what was best for themselves in the long run. That was starting to mean that if the French looked like they were going to lose. And there wasn't anything that anybody could do about it there was going to be some thinking about what side to be next. I think you can see this in modern nations fairly commonly.

At Fort Duquesne. Kept interlinear still possesses a formidable army of Delaware Shawny and Senecas who have not fallen under the missionaries influence. But how long will they remain loyal. Indeed how long can the Linearis maintain possession of the Forks of the Ohio with British Armies massing against him as close as forty miles to the east. Clearly the French and Indians must take the battle to their enemies once again. Delineate he decides to follow the strategy that led to success against Braddick. He sends raiding parties to meet the British and disrupt the progress of Forbes army. Two hundred miles away from his sick bed general Forbes reads the mind of his adversary. He also predicts the behaviour of his British and American troops whom he sarcastically refers to as. Heroes. To bouquet at loyal Hannah. He sends a strong warning.

I fancy you will judge as I do that the enemy may endeavor to surprise our outpost's or scouting party. Which with our heroes might have a bad effect. By what I see. They are not far from a panic. One week later. The French an Indian scouting parties are at work. The target is not Colonel Washington at Fort Cumberland but rather the new loyal hannah camp. Mere moments after arriving at loyal Hanah. Bouquet is introduced to French strategy.

Scarcely had I arrived in his camp when a soldier of the Pennsylvania troops with fear marked him his face came up to tell me that having gone out to hunt with one of his comrades. And a soldier from the Highlanders. They were attacked by Indians.

Two. Others. Fled like hounds.

The Highlanders took his ground and fired three shots. But was killed and scalped.

Colonel bouquet has thus far conquered the wilderness. He is within a hard day's gallop of the French. And now he is surrounded by a camp in panic. It is no time or place for a mistake. But bouquet makes one. That will cost him dearly.

Major James Grant of the 77 Highlanders approaches Colonel bouquet with a plan that contradicts the entire strategy of General Forbes for a safe and conservative campaign. Give me five hundred men. And I will get the boldness of this Indian. Like many soldiers in the British army in North America. James Grong was a Scottish Highlands. He had fought in Flanders and participated in one of the bloodiest battles of the year. The battle of Fontenoy in 1745 where he distinguished himself in the Royal Scots. When he came to America it was as a major in a newly race regiment of Highlanders known as Montgomery's Highlanders. James Grant came to America with a reputation as a brave experienced officer who could be trusted with a mission as hazardous as that which he was given. In September 1758

It is a top secret meeting bouquet confides in No one asks no council. He gives grants not five hundred but eight hundred men and orders him on the march the next morning bouquet will write to Forbes of major grant and his army. I saw him leave this morning. In splendid order. Nobody knows where Grant is going but the officers and the soldiers are off going out to do their best. Even though. The task is somewhat hazardous. The Highlanders were seen as particularly suitable for American conditions because they themselves came from a fairly rugged. Upland region. They were also seen as a marshal society of natural warriors by 1758 that the highlands are producing far more men than they can support economically. And those people are so far as the British crown are an ideal. To become soldiers because they are expendable. Because they are good fighters and because they will. Follow their leaders to the dead.

In addition to what Forbes will later call a thirst for fame major grant takes with him some of the Army's finest officers. His army marches into the heart of enemy country. He calls a halt. Ten miles from the French fort then another five miles closer.

Against all odds marching without drums pipes or horses. Grant's army arrives at Fort Duquesne undetected. Late on the evening of September 13 1758

the men are bone weary from the march. This moonless night they can see nothing but know that the feared French Indians rest just down the hill. The stories ring in their ears stories of braddock's field 

grant consents that he is about to accomplish with the great Braddick could not he will capture Fort Duquesne.  not Forbes not bouquet certainly not that upstart Washington he gets together some of his Islander's. He tells them going out to the Indian village or where he thinks the Indian village would be and attacked. Everything in sight. Grand realizes the time is of the essence. One of his raiding parties sets a fire a building outside Fort Duquesne. Another marches on Fort Duquesne in a direct assault. These moves will set off a chain reaction that leads to one of the fiercest combat actions of the entire war. At least in its beginning Grant's attack on Fort Duquesne is a major embarrassment for the French. They are literally caught napping. You'll find out your fort is being attacked when the attackers starts setting some of the buildings on fire. This is not a good start. Fortunately much like Braddock's defeat which started out very badly for the French they are able to recover themselves. It's another one of those very narrow squeakers when history balances on the point of a knife and it can go one way or another.

Grand Street today in downtown Pittsburgh bears no resemblance to the forested heights of 1758.

Only a bronze plaque marks the spot of a battle for empires. local residents assume that the street is our 18th president. But Grant Street does not honor Ulysses S. Grant. James Grant's name into the historical record. For far different reasons. On September 14th 1758. Grant decides a frontal assault would be an order. He still believes the forts lightly defended. He realizes that with the storage shed on fire the French have to know that he's there. In reality they didn't until he. Had his men start playing the bagpipes and beating the drum and he sent Captain MacDonald's company into the point and they almost got to the gates of for kicking. It's about 7 a.m. Now its first light. Of the French I could hardly believe their eyes to see this company of Highlanders marching straight towards the fort. They meet the Highlanders outside in the point. Fight a pitched battle but soon the Highlanders are overwhelmed. Captain MacDonald's killed. They get routed and back on the Hill. The French allied force sweeps around the flanks of the main body of Grants force spread out along the hill. The Highlanders at the front. Give way to superior guerrilla tactics. The Highland Companies rush to their aid meet a similar fate. Kept Captain normally led to about 500 men out from the Fort. But instead of marching in the direction of the beating grounds he advanced the Longdon one I'm gonna leave him and handed me.

The battle begin at once and so vigorously that dynamic took flight after 300 had fallen.

Grant holds the high ground.

But his troops are deployed poorly By companies. Attacked from forest cover by the world's finest geurrilla troops with the red coated British officers making fine targets. The Highlanders, Americans and Colonial's cannot hold. French Indians Fire. Into the Highlanders. Who were standing in the open. They were in ranks for the open order. They took massive casualties. Grant did the best he could to maintain some kind of order. It was a situation similar to what General Braddick found himself in a couple of years prior to.

Officers had Been killed. In less than half hour. All was confusion and as soon as that happened we were fired upon from every quarter. i endeavored upon to the troops. over  the. Horizon. I landed all on my boat. There. Were a group of Virginians are commanded by Captain Bullett they had originally been left behind about 2 miles back. Guarding the baggage. Captain bull would realize that there would be a total slaughter if nothing was done.

they lowered their muskets and blazed away. Sort of a running fight through the woods bullett manage to take himself and Virginian's. Back to. loyal Hannah Thomas pilots actions draw enemy fire and allow hundreds of British troops to escape certain death. The havoc that was made of our officers is a demonstrable proof of their obstinate defence. Having six officers killed and a seventh wounded out of eight. Captain bullets behavior is a matter of great admiration.

The major grant receives no such acclaim.

With only a few Highlander's at his side. He is captured. A third of his force is dead in the forest.

i show up to mcdonald and the skin was off his head

at the end of the day for Duquesne still belongs to the French

Colonel bouquet takes quill and heart in hand to write to his commander

in your present situation ill etc. It's doubly regrettable that I have to inform you of the misfortune which has befallen major grant defeated on the 14th of this month.

I make no apology regarding the part I have in this affair. I leave it to an account of the facts to condemn or justify me bouquets account spares no detail. And asks no pardon. The decision is the responsibility his conclusion he says. The provincial seems to have done very well. And their good men. Are more suitable for this warfare than the regular troops. Grants defeat before fort Cain came as a thunderbolt to John Forbes. Forbes was astounded that what had been an intelligence gathering mission had turned into a full scale firefight with disastrous consequences and heavy casualties. It's a testament to John Forbes's leadership that he was able to spring back from this defeat and to maintain the morale of his own force and the momentum of the advance against fort ducain. I could not believe that such an attempt would have been carried into execution without my previous knowledge and concurrence. I plumbed myself and our good fortune. In having the head of our army advanced to the beard of the enemy. And secured in a good post well guarded and cautioned against surprise. our road is almost completed and all this without any loss on our side.

In his letter Forbes does not judge Buquet too harshly. Forbes sees the mistake but maintains his respect for the officer upon whom it all depends. The general weakened from disease manages to reach Fort Bedford. And summons bouquet and Washington for a conference. The Virginians have acquired very great applause for their gallant behavior during the action. I had the honor to be publicly complimented yesterday by the general on the occasion. What may be the consequence of this affair I will not take upon me to decide. That our affairs in general appear with a greater gloom than ever.

Washington has been continuing to massed troops at Fort Cumberland while clearing Braddock's road toward Fort ducain in the faint hope that Forbes will order an attack by that direction or at least Washington himself can lead Virginia forces along the hard fought old road. But now. Forbes issues direct orders for Washington's army to march to loyal Hanna. The entire army will advance against the French over the new Pennsylvania road. at loyal Hanah. Both Washington and bouquet can see that Forbes is gravely ill. The general requests that a hut be erected for him. In the fireplace. Winter is coming on. There is enough of a doctor to nobody's dying man. And he knew that if he died before the campaign ended chances were very good that it wouldn't come to a successful conclusion.

For the French. The situation is more grave.

Clayton September Captain Dolina he sends a formidable force of 600 French and Indians against the British fortifications at loyal hAnna which is a hilltop fortress fit to stand a siege as Forbes had ordered. It contains inner and outer bastions and an abundance of artillery vigilant guards watched the perimeter.

October 12th the French army attacks. A force of 500 Highlanders and provincials hurries into the field. The French face and defeat this forces well.

The fact that the French raiding party is finally forced to retire by an artillery barrage. Does nothing to raise the spirits of bouquets army.

The French know they can't oppose a major arming. Like that of General Forbes with the small strength they have here. But their strike at loyal Hanah in October by. Capturing and killing horses and cattle destroying the transport ability the ability to move the British Army is a critical and a cunning thrust. It doesn't matter if they have big artillery pieces if they can't get them to Fort Duquesne. It's a. Really successful. Preemptive strike. The French throughout the war have shown themselves to be excellent. At this. The scout of the Huron rattles off Laurel Hill to the east.

There are rumors of a French army under the Marquis de Monck home marching south from Canada before winter to crush the British Army.

If. we abandoned this post. We'll lose all the advantage we have gained by drawing back our frontiers and defending the provinces. Which will be exposed as before. to Indian incursions.

Nov 11 1758 general Forbes calls a council of war to loyal Hanah that is attended by Washington and his brother officers. Autumn is fast giving way to winter. The weather is foul. Provisions are running short. Enlistments for the provincial troops will expire in less than three weeks. Forbes sees now that he has failed he will not take fort Duquesne. Time has simply run out on his well planned well run expedition. The council of war decides to halt the campaign. For the winter.

The risks being so obviously greater than the advantages. There is no doubt as to the so called prudence dictates. Forbes doesn't know it. But even as his officers meet another French allied raiding party is marching on loyal Hanah English scouts report the news the next morning. In response Forbes considers bouquets assessment of the fighting ability of the Colonial's.

Forbes orders his most experienced forest fighter George Washington to take 1000 Virginians and two groups to meet the enemy.

As the Raiders rest in their forest camp.

Washington leads an attack that surprises and destroys them.

He takes prisoners and secures the area.

But in the shadowy twilight Washington's men mistake the approaching second group of Virginians. For French reinforcements and opens fire

The second group sends a volley back.

The fight becomes severe.

At once Washington recognizes the mistake. He gallops between the firing lines amidst the smoke and darkness. He screams for orders his bullets sped past him. He knocks up aimed muskets with his sword. Until the firing ceases.

He will not speak of this incident for more than 30 years. And then as president of the United States he will admit to an admirer. Never was I in more imminent danger by being between two fires knocking up with my sword. The presented pieces.

it Was a terrible embarrassment for him. He shows his typical bravery and resolve in trying to correct it. But it's also a big mistake. And for that reason Washington for years prefers not to speak of it and It irritates him that other people do. In my own view it was an episode that shook him up a good deal because he had not had the kind of control over his command that he should have exercised as its commanding officer.

But amidst the disaster comes unexpected redemption. One of Washington's prisoners taken in the earlier raid is a renegade Englishman who suddenly begins speaking of desperate conditions at Fort Duquesne. Its 500 defenders are starving. In the wake of Grant's defeat. The Huron in Ottawa have bloated themselves with plunder and departed claiming that the French no longer needed their services. It seems to Washington. That if ever the forks of the Ohio can be taken it is now. The prisoners captured by Washington. In that last little raid at loyal Hanah are extremely important. The British now learned that most of the French garrison has had to leave and go back to Canada before the ice sets in. And now the very small garrison left at Fort Duquesne would be unable to resist any kind of thrust. The British could make. Based on Washington's information. Forbes hastily calls his officers together once more. Dangers be damned. He will not ignore this important intelligence. He issues orders at once. Two thousand five hundred chosen men will march on the force. Colonel Washington will lead. Along with Colonel Montgomery of the hydatids. Weapons and ammunition and provisions shall be carried on the backs of the men. No tents or wagons. No camp fires. The men shall sleep on. Their arms. No loud noises or firing of muskets. 100 lashings to any man who fires a weapon. All Dogs shall be hanged to maintain a silent approach.

Thirty miles away Captain Dillon Yaari believes that his raids have worked. That there will be no English advance this autumn. His men beg for food and yet he continues to hold the forks for his sovereign majesty King Louis. And then suddenly there is word of yet another British advance. To Nino. He hasn't enough French regulars Shawnees and Delawares on hand to send out a raiding party. He dispatches an urgent war belt to a nearby Delaware village allies that have been his strongest.

The war belt is returned to [french name] along with a shocking reply. Give it to the French captain and let him go with his young men. He boasted and much of his fight. Now let us see its fighting. We have often ventured our lives for him and had hardly a loaf of bread. Now he thinks we should jump to serve him.

Washington continues to make a slow advance. He draws near the prized Fort Duquesne but with no Indian Guides he loses his bearings in the endless hills. East of the Forks. You will see my anxiety on account of Indians. I have been sadly puzzled for want of a guide and the service has suffered by it. I applied for one before I left but was told there was no occasion for any.

Forbes's in physical agony consumed by disease. Borne slowly toward the forks on a litter mounted between two horses. He sends Washington a calming. Paternal reply. Be so good as to send me back with a fresh horse where you are this night where you go to morrow. For orders. Colonel Montgomery has. As far as you have learned the distances of the places before you. And where you intend to push for. We may assemble. And proceed together. Wrote in my letter so excuse. Me almost obedient John Forbes.

In his headquarters at Fort Duquesne. Francois Dumas Shans Sealab paces and Ponder's. One more desperate attack on the English. Bojo had done it. Three years earlier against Braddick. Facing unthinkable odds.

The Pageau had attacked on a bright day in July on dry trails. Bojo had drawn from villages around the fort that teamed with eager Indian warriors. Bojo had moved on a belly fattened by food from Canada. Now there are no eager warriors. And there is no food from Canada.

And Barjot is dead. And buried yonder in the fort graveyard.

Barjot's dead. And so it was fort desquesnet [ducain]. But delusionary cannot imagine a force of the Ohio in English hands.

Must be a way he can keep the forks in his grasp.

Washington pushes on in brutal conditions. In biting November cold with axes breaking at every instant.

He reaches the Turtle Creek just north of the site of Braddock's defeat. The sea of bleached bones and Braddock's field service testimony to the cunning of the defenders of Fort Duquesne. Washington's men suffer another cold camp. No tents and no fires. They never let go of their muskets. The French attack will come. They are certain of that. An attack always comes from Fort Duquesne.

But it is a quiet night. Followed by a quiet day.

On November 24. They are within ten miles of the enemy. They cut their road as they have cut it for nine days.

Suddenly. They hear a booming explosion in the distance that shakes the ground. They fear it is the opening artillery fire of the long awaited attack. They pause and hear a few more booms smaller distant echoing in the hills. Washington can't imagine this but he forces his men to push on.

At the forks of the Ohio captain {french name} watches the dust settle over the rubble of Fort Duquesne. He had ordered 50 barrels of powder to be detonated in the Fort. And whatever remained of the walls to be set afire.

I saw that the fault was entirely reduced to ashes and that the enemy would fall to nothing but the iron work of the community buildings [french name] knows the British are coming and he can't stop them. He sends some supplies to the other French post removes the artillery. You have some supplies to the Indians you never know when you'll need friends in the future. He leaves 60 barrels of ruined gunpowder and the powder magazine up just over here. Distressingly close to where we're standing. Sets it off with the fumes. And explosion levels most fort Duquesne is heard even by the British as far away as Turtle Creek. There were probably only about 50 men still at the fort at the time it was destroyed and basically it was time to go. But where we can give Forbes and his army a lot of credit was just in presenting this picture of an overwhelming force the french that made it their position obviously untenable. And they decided to cut their losses and move on. The commander in his garrison pushed their way north up the Allegheny in a small fleet of Bato. Abandoning the forks of the Ohio. And next day. The British army marches in with drums beating.

After many battles for Fort Duquesne. George Washington and his commanders Forbes and Buquet. Capture the forks of the Ohio. Without firing a shot. When Washington saw the fort ducain had been abandoned and destroyed. He must have felt an extraordinary sense of relief. And probably he felt a considerable sense of satisfaction in knowing what he'd striven for for the last four years. It finally came to pass. Washington was weakening physically at this point because he had dysentery for at least a couple of months before and was seriously worried about his health and so he was relieved I think to be able to to to think that he would soon be able to go home to Virginia and course he had good reason to want to do then because he was engaged to be married to Martha Custis. Who was perhaps the most desirable widow in Virginia who would bring a great. Fortune to Washington's family and who would be for him. I think the key not only to domestic happiness but also the key to a new status. As a leader in Virginian's society. Honorable sir. I have the pleasure to inform you that Fort Duquesne. or the ground rather on which it stood. Was possessed by his Majesty's troops on the 25th instant the possession of this fort has been a matter of great surprise to the whole army. The capture of fort ducain at the very end of 1758 marked a significant development in the course of the French and Indian War. Not only was it a crushing blow to French prestige in the Ohio Valley where they had previously exerted such influence over the Indian tribes but also it had an important symbolic value Braddock's defeat in 1755 had been more than simply a military defeat. It had been a crushing blow against Anglo American prestige. It was a point of honor to capture Fort Duquesne. So when John Forbes did that it was a symbolic victory as well as a strategic game.

For John Forbes. The glory will be fleeting. he's a brilliant leader beloved by his men. And his health is failing by the day. The irony ultimately was not Forbes fell ill early on in the campaign probably by late spring or early summer 1758 and was increasingly incapacitated during the expedition. By the disease that ultimately killed him. In March of 1759 this excellent medical service that he'd helped produce wasn't really able to in the end help him. Forbes managed to overcome. That ethnocentrism of most British officers at least enough to understand that the Indians who lived at the forks of the Ohio were people who had needs and whose needs could be met reasonably by diplomatic means and that by recognizing that seeing them as people he was able to detach them from the French alliance and he was able therefore to bring his campaign to a successful conclusion. Without a single shot fired. And an assault on fort ducain

the Native American empire will not fare well in an English Ohio country during the American Revolution. Probably the most effective thing that the British had as a weapon against the. Americans in the theatre that runs from central New York into Delaware was the Iroquois incursions of the area. They were so effective that they virtually shut down all the farming and anything going on in there to respond to that. Washington sent an army to destroy the Seneca country. Under General John Sullivan. 1779. That army came and destroyed most of the Seneca Kyoga and Onondaga villages. They called him the town destroyer. And at that moment one had to say that the opinion of the Senate because of George Washington was quite low. But george washington would spent 15 years in public office and during that fifteen years things changed. At a different moment when they needed to find ways to come to peace with the Indians in the Ohio Valley. George Washington called on the seneca because they had tried to help them with that negotiation. It didn't work out but the relationship between the senecas and George Washington was quite good. It was so good in fact. That in the religious tradition of handsom Lake which arises. During this period. George Washington is offered a special place in heaven because of his honesty and positive feelings toward the senecas

aand what of Mary Jemison. The english settler taken into the Seneca tribe.

She will choose to live with the Indians for the rest of her life. Spending more than six decades in their midst.

It is a fact that they are naturally kind. Tender. And peaceable. Toward their friends. And that those cruelties. Have been practiced only upon their enemies. According to their idea of justice.

In another generation. The Native Americans will be displaced. The revolution will be won laurels will be placed upon the heads of Washington Franklin and the other founding fathers. But there was a war before the American Revolution a war that produced America's first heroes on America's training ground for revolution.

WASHINGTON had helped to shape great events as a man in his 20s he affected the course of three great empires and in the end without George Washington's first war the greatest empire might never have been bron at all. What if Washington hadn't survived the Seven Years War would there have been a successful American War of Independence. I can't imagine that there would have been as high a probability. OF. Ultimate success and independence without Washington in the picture and so whether that means that the revolution wouldn't have happened you know wouldn't have succeeded. I can't say it certainly would have been a very different episode had there not been this figure this sort of by that point. Thoroughly self-control. Rock solid figure at the head of the Armies

Without him. It's hard to imagine that there could have been the same kind of success that ultimately resulted in the revolution.

Washington would become immortal. And yet never forget his first campaigns as a soldier. Campaigns at the Great Meadows or Fort Necessity. And at the Battle of the Monongahela. Braddock's defeat. I could not let the anniversary of the 3rd or 9th of this instant pass. Without a grateful remembrance of the escape we had at the Meadows. And on the banks of the Monongahela. The same providence that protected us upon those occasions. Will I hope. Continue his mercies. And make us happy instruments in restoring peace and liberty to this once favored but now distressed country.

Your servant. George Washington.