Pier 54. New York City.

On May the 1st 1915 2000 passengers boarded one of the fastest most luxurious ships in the world. The Lusitania.

Was a wonderful status. Check for red Fernholz and she was a beautiful sight to see. She was. Eating Stanley and her family were heading home to England. And in the midst of the most brutal conflict men had ever experienced. The First World War was almost a year old and any transatlantic crossing was made potentially dangerous by the presence of German submarines. Still the passengers felt safe. After all the Lusitania was a passenger ship.

On her last day at sea. The Lusitania was approaching the Irish coast.

Her two o'clock in the afternoon and you could see hawsers coastline. Was a beautiful day to be any better.

Terrific. Daphne but. Actually you don't know what it was.

The single German torpedo did such damage that the Lusitania could launch only six of her lifeboats. Before she went down.

They could not take the people begging to be taken in. Or capsize and everybody would have gone.

Trough the drought. Drought and a drought. Rather beset.

Among those who drowned were a hundred and twenty eight Americans.

The memory has faded for all but a very few some of whom you'll hear from but because it has affected so much of what has happened since the bulk of this program is about the First World War the Great War they called it began in June of 1914 with the assassination of the Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria Hungary. He was shot by a Serbian nationalist in Sarajevo. Ferdinand had governed in a circle of European royalty that also included the king of England the Czar of Russia and the Kaiser of Germany. And together their colonial empires dominated most of the Earth's population and when the competitive Keyzer seized upon the assassination as a pretext to begin a European war he found the other royals only too willing to go along. All of them sought to widen their influence. None could possibly realize how radically they were about to alter the course of the 20th century.

In the summer of 1914 the generation that would fight the First World War was enthusiastic about doing so. Those young men who were so quick to answer their nation's call to arms had no reason to anticipate the hill ahead.

In the German city of cold Lem's 12 year old Joachim von elbette began a diary.

August 5 1914. The city is full of.

That is singing this song. On. Two. To. Be born on. To fight for the Fatherland. To. Him. The. Swan.

The optimism of the Germans was matched by their allies in Austria. And by their enemies in Russia. In France and in England.

As soon as I enlisted in the crowd the other 18 19 and 20 year old Luis overs are going to be a tremendous tremendous luck to go and not in the case of his protege.

Everyone everyone thought the war would be over Christmas really but they wanted to get to France to get the fighting.

The Germans attacked first and very quickly they were through Belgium and into France. The romantic notion of war that so many young men carried into battle was very quickly shattered. The new weapons of war were so ferocious that by the end of the first year French casualties alone would approach a million man.

Named in your state in these casualties. And when they came in they were actually crushing

the first bridge for the. Sphere. That. For. The victims of what was called the massacre of the innocents in Germany these boys from high school or college who were given a couple of months training and sent off to the front and who died in tens of thousands in a few weeks. Now I'm nothing like that never happened before. Do any come from your and. This was the Flohr of German youth. They were they the the best educated young men. They were from middle class families almost exclusively. And they had no expectations to all of this terrible thing was going to happen. I had.

Americans had never dreamed that a war on the other side of the ocean could affect them. The US was officially neutral. In most of its citizens assumed it would stay that way.

People were going about their own business object being to make money. Good business. Everything was very pleasant to the.

It's hard for people who were there then to realise how the world has changed. On New Year's Day President Wilson had open house at the White House

and he can go down. We went on once I was at Okinawa I was told he went on with Winston Q and it moved out and we all went through and shook his hand to hand the president on Tuesday.

But certainly America was changing the pace of life quickly

almost overnight. Henry Ford's historic assembly line. Had lowered the cost of making cars. As well as the cost of buying the mass produced Model T came in one color black. Two hundred ninety five dollars it was the first car priced within reach of ordinary Americans. We played baseball in the streets. There was no problem of playing baseball. When horses and wagons dominated a traffic going became a problem when automobiles and trucks came in.

So much in America was changing as Europe went about its ugly war.

That this first movie. That I attended. I recall the scene where there was a great deal of shooting.

As they came to the front of the screen. The figures get larger and larger. And I thought they were coming at me and I started freebee. So badly that they take me out of the movie house

as movie making techniques improve. Movies became an American Obsession and it was in the movie houses that Americans were exposed to the war in Europe. In the movie house it still seemed glamorous

every Saturday morning and diversity of our pictures. The war

pure for you and all forms a dashing that cavalry but their flashy sabres and Babylon chop had Paish mouths.

I was just thinking Joeckel.

The movies were the perfect proving ground for the new art form called propaganda. Americans saw and soon sympathized with the British view of the Germans.

By early 1915 the war in Europe was good for America. US banks were lending huge amounts of money to Britain and France. Who in turn used the money to buy arms from American factories. With the war Americans were in the greatest economic boom in their history. During the war. Everybody

before the war. My father brought home six or seven dollars a week. Now he brought home checks for a hundred a hundred and ten dollars a week. It was like. It would be like bringing home a cheque for a million. The war had another effect. It virtually cut off European immigration to the United States. Causing a labour shortage in American factories. And that forced Northern employers to look for the very first time with a substantial black labour pool. Of the American South. Black newspapers. The window itself. And. Told them come one of them would get your job take you. You don't have your state or your religion.

My. Relatives. And. Uncles. Cousins. Came. Not.

To get into factories. And steel mills. Jobs that just would have been available. To blacks under normal circumstances.

This great migration from the south kept America's economy strong and vigorous while the increasing economic stake in Britain and France. Encouraged greater support for their war against the Germans. But the war was not going well. And the idea that Americans might yet have to be involved was now an issue. All over the United States with the support of former President Theodore Roosevelt potential volunteers began to train for battle.

By Christmas 1914 the armies of Europe had completely bogged down and fighting had spread to Russia. Africa and the Middle East. The empires drew on their colonies for manpower. Sixty countries were eventually represented in the conflict. The Germans had expected to win in 42 days but they had not anticipated what would happen on the Western Front in France.

On the western front the German assault had finally failed and soldiers on both sides had raced to dig an elaborate trench system that stretched for 300 miles from the English Channel all the way to Switzerland.

On New Year's Day in 1915 the young man who had gone off to fight glorious battles were now trapped in a desperate war of attrition.

Sobhraj said to us excitedly. Jack Smith said What about Tim. He's dead. If he jumped. The first one either the tile had to be shot. I said What. Yes she states it put his head too far over. The side put Gusti.

That cause a bit of a sensation about my lad. I thought. Well she's done the exact la play called for the business. But later from that day outwards. The the. It was three kill kill kill kill kill.

By then. Was best for.

A young American poet Alan Seeger was among those looking for adventure when he joined the Foreign Legion to fight for France. His diary reveals how seldom he found it. It's a miserable life shivering in this Richard holes in the dirt. We're not leading the life of men at all but that of animals. Living in our holes in the ground. And only showing our heads outside to fight and to feed.

May be that about six months. Comforted Bobs. So practically all day. APSO queued up for lice. We used to say to think. We wanted to come to this whole.

I said yes we did.

Every so often one side or the other seized a few hundred yards of territory only to be forced back again. Surrendering what had cost hundreds of lives to win. The front never moved more than a mile or two in either direction.

By the spring of 1915 the generals had concluded that the best way out of the stalemate was to blast the enemy. Out of their trenches.

The same factories and assembly lines that had begun to contribute to life in the 20th century. Were now retooled to create massive killing machines.

This was the realization of war.

Clinton triumphs victories.

Mine was a shell holes. A No no.

It was just like a lunar landscape.

That night that wraps. That. Group join us live. Not in the ban on the corpses. Is it possible to get it that very.

Way put dead bodies at the bottom of the trench so we could. Start to draw some occasion dead bodies was put on the top of the trench to make it higher so that we could walk. A bit better. It says a French.

And contributing to the stalemate were new weapons.

By now the machine gun had been perfected to the point that a single soldier could command as much firepower as 40 rifleman.

The tank made its first appearance invented by the British to get to the dense thickets of barbed wire that protected the enemy trenches. And in April 1915 the Germans introduced the most terrifying weapon of all. Poison gas

no one had ever seen before. This is the moment when chemical warfare was invented.

It scared the living daylights out of the Canadian troops that were hit by it.

The first world war had become a contest not of fighting spirit but of technological might and for the soldiers caught in the middle of it. There was no way forward and no way back. There was simply indifference.

Burish SRAW that boisterous somebody's creeping up on.

The perfect shoulder that would have been somebody with no imagination whatsoever.

Prioleau had too much about

so many men who'd been to these dangers and anxieties. Broken they were the victims of shell shock you know.

There was a breaking point for most people. For everybody really. Robbed of all humanity and courage and everything else makes life worth living really.

You just had to have something less than human.

The stalemate in the trenches continued through 1915 and into 1916 when the generals decided to go back to their original weapons.

The river some northern France. Early summer 1916.

Along the front. Twenty five miles wide a massive allied army prepare to attack. Thousands of British Tommies as they were called would lead the charge and they would follow one of the most intense bombardments in the history of warfare. An artillery barrage that would last an entire week.

The battle of the Somme. Was about to begin.

Without God if there was it was a terrible role for the fight. But the Polish officers said Tamala boys will be over the top hat. Don't worry says Dabwido. Trenches that our shells have blown to pieces. No job journalists there. They are blown to pieces. All you have to do is walk home. Take those strange shoes. In fact you carry old rifle like a bag.

The Germans after the shelling they simply come out of the dugout grab their machine guns and then waited for the Tyner's.

Simply shrug them down. So cutting down they didn't get 200 feet in that trench

when German machine gunners said like stop firing because I was sickened by what we were doing.

It was the bloodiest day in British history. 20000 men killed. 40000 wounded.

And yet the day after and for days after that young men continue to be ordered out of their trenches. And into near certain death

post volunteer Alan Segar was killed on July the 4th. On the same morning. Ted Francis waited for the signal to go off for shows down below us in the trenches with a whistle blower that twisted to make a dash out of the trenches and back for this job. Tim.

Had the CDC those to. Fortify predicts that we'd look at each other. And say. Oh we're now doing this.

So we're visibly shaken. So we're crawling. Of course when the whistle went. We had to scramble all.

The battle of the Somme would come to define the futility of the first world war. It went on for six more months at the cost of a million men. And at the end of it the Allied armies had moved a grand total of five miles. The guns of the Somme were so loud and so insistent that they were heard across the English Channel in London. A hundred and fifty miles away.

In every country that was involved in the war there were growing problems at home. After so many years of struggle the disillusionment of the battlefront. Now extended to the home from Russia in particular was ripe for revolution. Its people were starving and its battered army was on the verge of defeat.

In February 1917 food riots broke out in the city of Petrograd which had been called St. Petersburg. In no time Russia was embroiled in full scale revolution. The ruling family led by Tsar Nicholas was brought down 300 years of royal rule were replaced by a provisional government that stubbornly decided to continue the war.

The Germans chose this moment to help a Russian revolutionary return home. From exile. A man who spoke for a socialist movement known to Russians. As the Bolsheviks. His given name was Vladimír enough. He's better remembered as Vladimir Lenin.

Sasha Jansky served as Lenin's bodyguard.

Most of us spoke with a lot of gestures just forward calling us through the chants. Saying power had been taken over by the bourgeoisie that went on with the bloody war. A new order had to be established. To ensure the power of the working class. Lenin and the Bolsheviks hoped to create the world's first communist state where all land capital and political power would be given to the people.

For many Russians it would mean the end of frivolous.

Thinking. Of. If they should be. It would mean the end of. That that we knew.

I. Remember. One evening at our country place I was running down the lawn to call my mother to tell her that supper was ready and I suddenly stopped and it was all that beauty around the roses the trees the park the lawns. It was a beautiful place. It was sunset and I stopped and said all this. This is Piers all of this will be gone. It was the one moment party member. That feeling of fear that the world of which I was part was.

And it would. Fall in October 1917. Lennon encouraged an insurrection against the provisional government that had replaced the fallen czar.

The end came at the Tsars. That's.

You. Ran up the carpeted stairway in the very first room I saw soldiers standing with their rifles. I shall go. Put down your weapons defended just drop their weapons and you left.

We saw the fire. That night and then after five or six days the shooting died. So we knew it was over.

Surely. He. Had won.

With Lennon's victory. Russia quickly withdrew from the war. But the Germans had seen their plan succeed only to find that they now faced a new opponent.

It was clear to most Americans now that Germany regarded them as an enemy to

President Woodrow Wilson resisted the demands to get involved for a while. But by 1917 the Germans had increased their attacks on unarmed ships and then they brazenly urged Mexico to invade the United States. The president felt he had no other option.

On April the 2nd 1917 Woodrow Wilson stood anxiously before a special session of Congress. And asked for a declaration of war. He hoped it would be the war to end all wars.

He said it is a fearful thing for me to drive a great peaceful and will the good be one are the most terrible and disasters of all wars. But let me tell you this right is more precious than peace.

The idea of the last great.

Was very very strong strong appeal

and it certainly influenced me a great deal. Soldiers never get to see another war. This is the time to see a.

In the summer of 1917. American troops landed in France returning the favor of Lafayette's the French soldier who had fought with America during the Revolutionary War. One of the officers who stated loud enough. For everybody. And he was waving near Lafayette. They had no love yet.

We are here.

Filberts at the end of having.

Decided to go.

I was upset to say no right.

They were untouched by the. Exiles.

That has affected everybody else. By that stage.

They were. They were Americans. Now they were married. They were what Deborah was supposed to be. They were enthusiastic. They were also badly armed. Poorly trained. And like the Europeans before them completely unprepared. For what lay ahead of.

The train came through. From the.

And we've got this cold war to close which we did so we could get on it. And ask guys how far is out there what's going on and what you are doing. And I was a hospital sorry.

I can see these four kids. Like me a youngster. By the way. Are two arms gone.

This is kind of a cold water treatment. All of a sudden realize what it's like.

You grew up very quickly. Surroundings like fat.

That is no longer fresh prince stuff is.

Real.

By 1918 with thousands of Americans pouring into France every day. The Germans decided they had to do something massive.

In March 1918. The German army tried its last major dam class major offensive on the Western Front. The successful. Horrible. On. The Western Front moved war of moment finally arrived. And after years of impasse the Germans suddenly threatened to overwhelm the allies and actually captured. The French capital. Paris.

To Germany had a. Goal it sweeping everything up on God yet. They have a dire threat to Paris was so severe that a million people simply left the city. Germans got to within 30 miles

despite these still semi trained American divisions. Were thrown into the bath along with the French managed to stop the.

The Germans had put everything into this last desperate effort. And when it was over. They were finally spent. Along the western front that autumn. The focus shifted. From war. To peace.

On the 10th of November the Kaiser was forced into exile by his own government. A victim of the war he had helped to start.

This touched me. So deeply that I can't tell you who has a little picture of the Kaiser in that room did I do. I put that black tie around the picture to show my sorrow. This tremendous change in history.

And finally at the 11th hour on the 11th day of the 11th month. November 1918 the Germans formally surrendered.

Certainly. The guns stopped and there was that terrible shock. If somebody. Had hit me over the head with a big padded.

Shrapnel Hosh. After four years of continual gunfire. And become part of our lives it seems to be something missing.

We didn't believe it the.

One of the greatest calamities in human history was over. And America's veterans began to return home.

The trouble was that having made the world a safer place American veterans returned to a very uncertain future. The economy that had boomed during the war was now shrinking. Factories were laying off workers just as veterans came looking for jobs.

They had no help to find a job. And should go to school to finish college education. When you took care of test staff staff said. You had no more connection with thick but are they with you. You are on your own.

In the winter of 1918 Europe. Was a disaster. The empires of Germany Austria and Russia have been shattered. Leaving destitute nations in their wake.

Even the victors. Britain. And France. Grappled with ruin and raised.

In all. Nine million men die.

Every family. Had lost someone.

A son. A brother. A cousin.

A friend.

For years the wounded in the maimed haunted the streets of every city in Europe.

And even those who had escaped physical harm were forever changed by the great.

Sometimes I'm thinking about the war o'clock the

I believe that each. Like best friend they kill

all I want all. That. Was just as hard as it did.

I lost all my youth. I lost the best years of my life you might say. And I lost so many friends. It was all loss for me. I mean a few medals. Don't make up for that you know.

Nobody wins in a war. They lost. We didn't win.

Into this chaos of traveling to a post-war peace conference in the French town of Versailles came President Woodrow Wilson. With him. President Wilson brought his so-called 14 points which called for liberty and self-determination for all even the enemy.

The people of Britain and France greeted Wilson ecstatically for he represented the hope of democracy.

But the British and French governments were interested in revenge.

The peace treaty as the politics of hatred. It was the encapsulation of every mean spirited element on the allied side. The new Soviet Union was completely excluded from the peace conference. And not one victorious power was ready to give up a colony sowing the seeds of future discord. Britain and France added several colonies. By carving up the middle east. As for the Germans they were forced to accept conditions that would humiliate. And impoverish them for years. In the end Versailles was about punishment not piecemeal. In many ways all those men who died not many men died for nothing.

Almost before it was over them. It was clear that the legacy of this war would be anything but the end of all wars. Within 30 years. These same nations would all fight again. Over precisely the same ground.

The war had shown technologies dark side. But dark or bright. Technology was here to stay. And in the decade that followed an electric pulse of change ran through America. See that on the next episode of the century America time. Thank you for joining us. Peter Jennings.