New York City's great white Broadway.

Show of the 1920s the nightlife here different bands play. Liquor flow. And everyone who was drinking it. Was breaking the law. In the first month of the new decade the 18th Amendment became the law of the land. The sale and consumption of alcohol. Was now.

There was prohibition. Oddly enough. Nobody paid any attention to.

Into people's homes. Dreadful thing was called Orange Blossom. Which was gin and orange chick's. Fault.

Badge.

Liquor was now sold behind closed doors in places called speakeasies proprietors took the risks and reap the profits. Good money indeed. I was 15 years old. I was writing Eleanor Nash convertible. We had four speakeasies. One by the Daily News one by the Daily Mirror. Had people you in. OK guides explain who he was the show ID or something. You met him in.

You got to know like family after.

Every corner saloon. Whenever rated. Cops were. Partying. And. Stuff. People wanted to drink. During. The Great Game. He became a dangerous game for the high stakes players. Battles between rival gangs for control of illegal liquor territories riddled American cities with a mushrooming murder rates. Prohibitions aim was to sweet liquor off the city streets. Now they were flooded with gangsters and gun buyers to try to persuade as myself. You had. To have them. Or else.

Prohibition and the general disregard which followed it was the perfect symbol for the twenties. A decade which was about crossing the line smashing tradition. Breaking.

Is modern America came of age in the 1920s boundaries of all sorts technological geographical. And social worship.

The roar in the Roaring 20s was the birth scream of the modern America was now about to leave behind the formative experience of its rural past and embrace the promise of an urban future. But progress would have its price a sudden wrenching departure from the certainties of the traditional and the familiar spread by an emerging mass media movies and the radio things that seem old and familiar now are just beginning to take shape in the 1920s.

At the dawn of the 1920s America was clearly entering a new era an era defined by a vast and complicated urban culture. That would dominate the rest of the 20th century. After World War One there was an eagerness to embrace the new and it was in America's cities most dramatically in its biggest New York. Where the modern age was born.

The very architecture of the city spoke of America's new ascendancy. And her aspirations.

These. Skyscraper. Was. An example of the new form. Achieving a kind of. Thrilling scale nobility.

For people work there. And then lived in the average small town in America.

A movement to the 70s that had started during World War One accelerated in 1920 for the first time more Americans lived in urban centers than in country towns and villages.

The pace has been set. The city is irresistibly attractive is really at a kind of high tide in this decade. It's a force a magnet.

The very names of New York streets would become synonymous with progress and innovation. Broadway would represent the best and latest in American entertainment.

Madison Avenue would come to stand for the bustling new business of advertising which was uniting the nation in a set of shared fantasies and desires.

And Wall Street came to represent the decades expanding economic opportunity.

Wall Street was where the action was. People came from everywhere to get in on.

The night come to New York. Was there was nobody there after they closed the mines in 1926 in Pennsylvania there was no money coming there. This fella Jerry got me the first job. And he said. Come on down the wall street the streets are paved with gold.

It seemed that way to park in Fifth Avenues where the tycoons lived. The number of millionaires in the 1920s jumped 400 percent over the previous decade. The 20s feeling of limitless horizons was fuelled by their lavish lifestyle.

Family Pam house 934 Fifth Avenue when I was growing up. We had a place in Tuxedo Park and a house in New York and we used to come to Southampton in the summer.

Everybody seemed to be having a good time.

In those days you had lots of help. That it cook you had a kitchen maid. And you had a long dress. And then you had. A. Paul make. A.

And mother's maid. How does that make six feet. I think they were eight actually. Terribly Nice people. Almost everybody had a boat. I recall in the 20s you would see a harbour filled with yachts. I mean it really felt. Almost all the gunnel and we didn't refer to yachts as such unless there were a hundred feet or over.

Great entertaining.

People's houses. Seated in a harness of 50 60 people.

Always after dinner there would be entertainment by by guests.

George Gershwin was there with his orchestrator. Bill Daley. They got up and played on two pianos. Mother always had two grand piano in the big room downstairs. Gershwin who wrote Rhapsody in Blue and other anthems of the decades was profoundly influenced by the new music he had heard in a pub called. Jazz. The capital of jazz in the 1920s was just a subway ride uptown. In Harlem.

It was in Harlem clubs that one could see the artists at the forefront of this fresh and uniquely American music performers such as Louis Armstrong.

Bessie Smith. And dapper young man named Edward Kennedy Ellington his friends simply called him.

Guess.

What everybody else is heading in that direction.

The. First time. I was. The. First. Broadcast from the country. Were brought Hollywood tears rub elbows people came from all over the United States to experience what was going on in 20.

Went up to Harlem at night to dance and everything. We all saved up for months. To get that money to go out to. Mike.

Harlem was contributing more than music to America's new urban culture the world above New York's 125 street was in the 1920s a hotbed of political social and cultural activity. It was later called the Harlem Renaissance the Harlem Renaissance was one of those fancy terms that white folks when they want to take a particular look at some aspect of black folk. I don't think black folks run around saying that we don't have a renaissance or something like that but there was a holiday spirit. In Harlem was born this idea of the new found someone who stood up for the Negro who advertised his and her contributions to American culture who was proud to be black. Harlem was the end of the the promised land the place where all our fantasies came true.

If I had to choose between heaven or Harlem of course would win every.

While Harlem seemed a promised land for black Americans. New York's Lower East Side was for European immigrants. They are a gateway to the American dream.

We were blessed. Because we were in America.

My father came. From the Ukraine. He went to work in New York City and worked in a factory where they blocked. Hats men's hats. And he was making like nine or ten dollars a week working a six day week. And he. Would tell me how he was able to buy lunch every day. For 12 cents. And the lunch consisted. Of. A Herring a big schmaltz herring out of the barrel in my mouth waters now to think of it. And a big role with poppy seeds. And. An. Onion. And. Life was beautiful.

This was. Perhaps the most mixed city racially ethnically in the country. But cities all around the country. Have become more important because change was centered in the cities business industry culture.

Nothing like.

The magic of a thing.

The.

Makes.

That for this wonderful adventure and your life is having a shite

of a threat like a narrative a story if anything may on the decades startling changes would soon spread from America's cities. To envelop the entire nation.

Far from the speakeasies and the dance halls and the nightclubs there was another America in the 1920s. Here people still live their parents and grandparents. They like.

The 1920s. This was quite easy.

Me. And whether they would be discussion maybe.

Throughout the 1920s New technologies would transform daily life. At the beginning of the decade most Americans lived without electricity. When night fell only candles and lamps held off the darkness.

America was electrified in the 20s. Electric lights extended the day. Opened up new possibilities for work and play.

That surge of new power came first to the civets. And by the decades end the majority of American homes had electricity.

You can't understand this century without understanding the effect the impact of science and technology.

My father's generation is the one that really saw amazing changes that he was born in nineteen hundred. In a world where the horse was still the main means of getting about.

The car seen in the. More revolutionary anybody'd than anything that's happened since.

Totally changed the kind of space we built in really.

The car would give Americans a sense of autonomy and freedom. The freedom to escape their city or town. To go away on a vacation. Or simply on a days out. By mid decade the government was spending more than one billion dollars on the construction of highways bridges and tunnels. The beginnings of a national infrastructure which the country took.

My father took my mother and me in a car. For the first ride through the Holland Tunnel.

This was opening night. The cost of going up to go through.

I was like. I. Cringed. Suppose the breaks in. How did the tunnel under the water. We used. A batch and as we were running for two months I heard the waves of.

The so called highways of. Outside New York. We saw the billboards

roadways were soon dotted with a new phenomenon roadside advertising big and colorful.

And beautiful. Advertising helped transform not just the physical landscape but the cultural one. Along with advertising. Came the expansion of a brand new consumer concept. Credit. The old inhibition against debt came tumbling down as everything from cars to clothes could be bought on time. Buy now pay later became the order of the day. By 1927 75 percent of all household goods were bought on credit. And in the last years of the decade the item desired most was the radio

from its scratchy beginnings in 1920 as a mere hobby radio would become a nationwide phenomenon. As important as the car young radio enthusiast Albert swindling it was there at the birth of modern radio in 1920 the night station KDKA broadcasting from a factory rooftop in Pittsburgh transmitted the results of the presidential election.

One of the gentlemen was reading the election returns. He got sick Joe for about 45 35 or 45 minutes. I read election returns. Nobody had any comprehension of the significance of what was going on. But don't forget there were only a couple hundred listeners

within six months every story in America even grocery stores were selling radios.

Suddenly all Americans were listening to the same things and laughing at the same jokes. There was a kind of communal exercise here and very much a strengthening of your notion of what was to be an American. Along with and sometimes propelled by the great technological leap in the 1920s social patterns in place for decades also began to shift Nowhere was this more obvious than with the changes for American Women an expanding job market had given more and more women careers and the disposable income to do with what they wished. Throughout the 1920s women would assert a new found freedom and independence and nothing symbolized it more than the 19th Amendment in 1920. After eighty one years of agitation. Women won the right to vote.

Lott had changed in almost every way. She thought that she had the right to live for herself. Rather than. For her family. For others as women were always supposed to. She went to bars she went to after hours club. She went to wild parties. She had much shorter hair she wore a much more. Makeup.

You go from having known women whose dresses reached to their ankles. To. Flesh flesh everywhere.

And a lot of Twinings culture. Is about the fun. Of smashing. Prohibitions.

The more daring women of the day were known as flappers and vamps. Should Remember flappers all over the place. And they were older than me. But you know you look at it when you look at the flappers through the eyes of a young guy. Wow.

I think a flapper was the type of young woman who just wanted to. See how far she could go and then would stop because she'd be afraid to go too far. And evap didn't care how far she.

Shattering ways of 1920s city life were spread by the media to rural America. Places where the changes were not always so easy to get used to.

Smoking or drinking or being told using profanity this sifted down from the cities from New York and Chicago. And now this finally hit a wrong place in my community. Here was a girl you come from. She'd been working in Chicago she'd come home. The show addresses of not wearing short dresses hey we're going to church with and why does.

This suddenly become so bad for future generations.

This country was founded on respectful and a sense of righteousness. Keeping the Sabbath day and people brought their children up on the discipline that read the scripture and all of those things were of the things that bound together

the people were solid. Church. Your prime minister.

As the cities grew in size and influence many people in small town America found them threatening a breeding ground for new and often alien ideas

in one small American town. The forces of traditional religion and modern science would clash in a battle heard round the world. Here in Dayton Tennessee in the summer of 1925. One of the century's most famous courtroom battles would take place. Jonti Scope's stood accused of teaching Darwin's theory of evolution. That man and eight shared a common ancestor that was against the law in Tennessee.

The Scopes Trial attracted the best legal brains of the time. William Jennings Bryan three times presidential candidate and a Christian fundamentalist himself came to prosecute

Clarence Darrow the celebrated Chicago trial lawyer came to defend school

outside as the trial progressed in the scorching summer heat. Dayton had itself a carnival.

People would bring in trained chimpanzees dressed in suits and ties and they'd lead them up and down the street.

Read your Bible was. We're going to post about street crosses street banners. And you all baby jars just displayed you'd have a street preacher. I don't know what he's preaching about. He never saw the same people twice. He'd go to the same place next. Next day to be somebody from some other part. But it was it was a lot of.

Scopes trial became emblematic. Everybody had to make up their mind. People had never been to Tennessee. Couldn't find Tennessee. Had to think about this question. Do I believe in modern science.

At times it seemed that the whole world had converged on Daithi house where feel the walls were lined with newspaper people from England from Spain from France. We had so many newspaper people there that you couldn't Sterman distinct

when all the hoopla ended. John Scopes was found guilty and find a hundred dollars a ruling later overturned on a technicality. What Scope's represented and what the world came to witness was a colossal clash of ideals. The cool reason of science seemed to threaten the deep and abiding roots of religion. It was one thing to replace the family mule with a model T but quite another to trade. Matthew Mark and John for Einstein Freud and Darwin. For many people these were confusing times and what may have been the most unsettling about the pace of change in the 1920s was that people really wanted both the benefits of the future and the familiar comforts of the past.

They want the fruits of modernity. They want the water. Electricity radio. And at the same time they want it to remain 1850 and they know they cannot have both and this creates psychological tension. Within American society. That is then looking for somewhere to go. And it goes into its hatred towards immigrants hatred towards people who soon simply different. It goes into intolerance and into the Ku Klux Klan.

Ku Klux Klan membership soared to 4 million. In the 1920s.

Almost everybody. It was a good citizen. The South. Was a member of I think they were encouraging morality. By turning the light on. On immorality and deceit and unfairness. It created a great deal I'd say consternation and debate. So.

Yes. The blacks but they were opposed to the the Jews came have.

People's houses holding them out with things like.

This who is not to the south the Taliban. It was nationwide.

The Klan was actively recruiting in many northern states. My father was asked if he would like to join the Ku Klux Klan. He grabbed the guy by the collar and threw him down the stairs. Three nights later. Almost directly across the street there was a large cross burning.

I still can see it in my mind. It was a dreadful horrifying experience.

My mother said it's just as though they're guarding the gates of hell.

That all white people who carried into us were there with us. They caught hell. James Cameron was living in Indiana when he and two childhood friends were seized by a Klan inspired mob enraged by reports of the rape and murder of a white couple

men. And the crowd had had their robes and put onto and then their lives their take on the Niggertown. His two friends were lynched. James Cameron barely escaped with his life put a rope around my neck and heads toward the end of the tree. I kept crying Paul and I haven't done anything. Before they could hang me out arrested take the boy back here not to do with any killing raping added Dr Helen Nash Lord have mercy.

Throughout the decade an estimated 200 people were lynched by the Klan. This organization claiming to uphold the values and virtues of the past became so powerful in the 1920s that it seized political control in seven states and in 1927 Klansmen marched. 50000 strong down the streets of the nation's capital. Clearly the forces of 20s modernity have stirred a bitter resistance.

And.

In a decade fraught with so many changes people in the 1920s seem hungry for old fashioned heroes. And an explosion in spectator sports provided the. Sports giants became household names. Their every move followed by radio and an eager tabloid press. One name was known in more households. Than any other. Family ever baseball oriented. But I would have had to be deaf. Not to have heard about baby

George Herman. Ruth. The Babe. Reshaped America's pastime. In an era of big events he excelled at the game's biggest excitement. The home run. He hit 60 of them in a single season in 1927 a record that would stand for four decades. Fans drove from miles around. To see.

To get in the truck. Seven of us puts hay in the truck and just sit on it. And three and a half hours from Scranton to the Yankee Stadium.

It was 35 cents to see the babe. Lou Gehrig. The Yankee players.

Babe Ruth was a hero.

Very solid Sahiba.

Seems like everybody backed him as a hero.

We might get autographs. They graciously sent us pictures he said photostat Gutsche Fitch.

College fascination with flying. In the 1920s seemed fitting for a time when even gravity couldn't hold down progress. And when every boundary seemed just waiting from. Once I got up about a thousand feet. It was like I was home. And I'm not sure. I can describe it to you. I was home

I wanted to be anyplace else.

In 1927 one pilot would put aviation and himself on every front page in the.

Misty. Morning. Outside New York City. A plane called the Spirit of St. Louis was ready to take off for Paris. No one had ever flown solo across the Atlantic before. Six others had tried. Failed. And died. Ready to take the chance this time was Charles Lindbergh. The 6 foot 2 sign of a former congressman from Minnesota.

Thousands of people came to watch him take off.

Once he was out of sight. It seemed as if all America. Held its breath.

Yankee Stadium they had three minutes of silence praying for him. Everybody in the country.

Flying the fuel heavy single engine plane was a battle against weather hunger and fatigue for the entire 33 and a half hour flight. The Western world wondered about the fate of that tiny plane somewhere over the vast have left.

It was a Saturday night. They were they hadn't heard from him for a long time. And I was walking up 120 street and someone shouted they found them. He was flying over Ireland and within an hour or so. He landed in Paris.

Hundred thousand for reasons were there to welcome the Cheyenne. Lucky Lindy emerged from his plane carrying only a razor and a passport.

His flight had represented the best of an era. A mastery of modern technology joined with old fashioned values of courage. Individualism and hard won achievement.

When Lambert came back. It was as though he walked on the water. That couldn't get enough of. You wish this wasn't a prize you're.

A hero. Here was a nice guy who was young logo gawky but that was what they wanted. The parade Schulenburg down Broadway was the biggest national celebration since the.

Birth hey baby with. The person he was represented. It was Grace. Made a.

Very. Exciting for all of us. Because we realized that a young man could do great things.

After Lindbergh's triumph there remained only one continent for the airplane to conquer Antarctica. The frozen and forbidding landscape at the bottom of the world was the boundary one of the century's great explorers. Admiral Richard Byrd set out to break. His goal was to fly over the South Pole. His expedition was flooded with young and eager volunteers all of them wanting to be here.

We're going to select. A figure of how many Boy Scouts to go to the. I was about 12. And I was nominated as one of the guys to go. Now this was a big thing it was in all the papers. Like a promotion. My what do you think I'm going to go to the North Pole with Admiral Gourgeon. You can't go I. Why did you catch your death of cold.

I remember when my cousin was that. There.

Were a hundred and twenty man connected with the third expedition twenty year old Harvard student Norman Vaughn dropped out of school trained for a year and was finally selected to go on the adventure of a lifetime.

That brought him land that had never been. Seen or touched before. And that just excited me beyond words. Absolutely a new frontier.

The expeditions home base was called Little America. Its two year mission was to conduct geological research and prepare for birds record breaking attempt. We were responsible for getting out onto the interior of Antarctica or as far as we could to be there for Admiral Byrd's rescue expedition. Should he have had a forced landing.

He

just after midnight on November the 29th 1929 Admiral Bird's aircraft flew 500 feet above the geographic South Pole. He dropped a stone wrapped in an American flag.

Americans and their airplane had reached the ends of the earth.

By the end of the 1920s anything seemed possible.

The most extraordinary thing about the decade of the 21st was. Pandemics air of optimism a feeling that the future of the country was unlimited and.

One of the great. Jazz songs of the day was blue skies only by blue skies do I see

the president promised blue skies in the country's future and his inauguration in 1929. Herbert Hoover repeated the common wisdom of the day that Americans were on their way to riches. If proof was needed all one had to do was look at the bubbling pool of wealth. The stock market. The butcher the baker the can still make everybody. Oddly enough in the stock market one of my chauffeurs was. If he can be in the market anybody can be get.

So now regulations as we have now. People got away with barter all its time the government didn't bother them so they were all making money doing very well. A boom in Baie had driven up stock prices. Suddenly in October of 1929 investors started cashing in their overpriced stock a panic of selling started.

On October 29. 1929. It was obvious from the opening bell that things were wildly amiss.

930. There was a rumble on the floor. When the page was said he might look at the sell orders coming out of those phones.

The wheels really started to come off. The stock market went into a freefall. Crowds gathered in the street outside of the exchange. But three years after. The bell rang and that was it.

More than 30 billion dollars in paper value simply vanished that day. As the stock market crashed. The famous words the crash. Overnight. It was like bombs fell.

The 20s bubble had burst and with it the decades optimism

people lost every penny nothing.

Nobody had any pensions. There were no there was no Medicare Medicaid Social Security. If people lost their money that was it they were down and out.

People jumped off the George Washington Bridge which had only just then not want to go get that. People we knew. My father was wiped out. He. Never. Psychologically he never recovered.

29 I lost a million.

What do you do. Same story. Wash your face and hands and your head start all over again.

But as people would find out in the decade to come a decade is different from the 20s. As night is from day. Starting over. Was not going to be so easy.

America along with much of the world faced the Great Depression that's on the next episode of the century. America is time Peter Jennings. Thank you for joining us.