It was May 1932. And I wrote out the history of. Something was very wrong in the land of plenty. Of. Bloodshed and

there were those of us who felt that America was teetering on the brink of revolution.

For three years the Great Depression had tormented Americans. Now 20000 army veterans and their families came pouring into Washington to find out what the government was going to do about it. Bearded. Dragon. They were desperate. You could see it in their eyes. They'd been promised a bonus for their service in World War One. But it was not due to be paid until 1945. The desperate veterans wanted their money. Now they recall the Bonus Army.

From July 28 The Bonus Army came to blows with Washington police shots were fired. President Herbert Hoover barricaded himself in the White House and called out the troops. Have burned down the monetary and illegal and blamed the death knell for the ban. On.

When the smoke cleared two veterans and an infant were dead. Of the shameful the sacrifice of the young American boys. Left such an impression on me I have never forgotten that. They were just trying to feed their families.

Millions of Americans could no longer provide for their families. With nowhere to turn for help. They were angry and they were approaching a breaking point. Three years into the Depression the American system was in grave danger. Unless it could change and change quickly. It might not survive.

Bad times had arrived without warning. After a decade of expanding prosperity almost overnight the Wall Street Crash of 1929 shattered America's confidence in its economy.

I was 11 years old.

It was like the skies had grown dark

and all of a sudden faces were tragic and people were walking around in the hallways of our building and in the streets with inquiring eyes and saying has it happened to you as it happened to us. What is happening.

The living telegram and pretty soon you could feel the horror. Behind the door you was knocking when you knock on the door. When the voice came out. Yeah. Who was it. I have a telegram from the door. Go away. Get away from me get away from.

The collapse of the New York Stock Exchange. 1929 was only the most visible sign of a massive economic crisis the crisis that spread quickly from Wall Street. To Main Street.

Miriam Johnson was living in California. When the Great Depression arrived at her house that was 11 when the crash came. My father at that time along with a few friends owned a small grocery store.

One day he came home. And. Laid two dollars on the table in the kitchen and he said no more store. Everything is gone. Was the. Us that.

Every day could use my bankruptcy's more layoffs more people with less money in their pockets.

Even U.S. Steel a symbol of American industrial might since the turn of the century was brought to its knees. In three years the entire full time payroll was laid off. 225 thousand were.

The. Depression hit this country.

It hit the farm areas hit the cities.

They were just there out of work and out of food.

And everybody was baffled and nobody had that experience before.

I had been saving for maybe five six years. A piggy bank money in a piggy bank. Nickels pennies dimes the most. It turns out that I was the only one of the family that had any money. Because one day I came home and I grabbed hold of my piggy bank just to give it a shake. And there was. Nothing. In it.

Mother was looking at me. And she said. Your father borrowed the money.

He has to go out to look for work and he needed money to.

He came home and I didn't say anything but. My eyes face was swollen with tears. Eyes were blinking with tears. And my father took me in his arms and he said. I'm sorry. I have. To have money. But it's a loan I'll pay it back to you. He never did. He knew.

My family had exhausted all its credits with the local merchants. And on one occasion my father came home and asked what was for dinner that night and my mother said there's nothing. How how could that be. How could that be nothing. It was one of the few times in my life that I was fearful for myself fearful of losing what little they had left people rushed to the banks to withdraw their savings but the banks too were short of cash. One year after the crash 800 of them had failed.

Nine medium savings accounts were wiped out. There was a janitor called George Calix who had a thousand dollars in the bank of the United States taking Gallis. 40 years to save a thousand dollars. After spending two nights two days in the pouring rain outside this shuttered locked back. Beating literally beating on the walls with his hands in frustration he realized he was never going to see 10 cents for his money.

And he went back to the basement where he lived. And he hanged himself. In despair. That's what bank failures did. They crushed. Tens of thousands maybe hundreds of thousands of ordinary people like George Galloway

with their savings gone and layoffs increasing. People were forced to sell their cars their furniture their wedding rings. Before long half the country's home mortgages were in default. Families across America found themselves facing eviction.

My brother and I and my mother just couldn't stand to see it happen so we left. My father had to face the auctioneer. We came home that evening and we met my father who told us the house was so it was gone and everything that we had had was no longer how the land was gone. The house was gone and we had 30 days in which time to move

and my mother sat on the side of the bed and cried. First time I've ever seen her cry.

I'll never forget that moment.

That's how our family was affected. We were not unique.

You know what hurt me most about it was the look of pain on my mothers and fathers face. I couldn't bear to look at them. To look at the look at their misery to look at a disgrace.

They felt they had only themselves to blame. This was a different generation. This was a generation. That. Had grown up. With the old faith the faith self-reliance that people had to stand on their own two feet.

They say the government has failed me. They said I'm too. I failed in this American system. It's my phones.

One year after the crash. Four million American families were without any means of support. Worsley they didn't know how to ask for help. And their government didn't know how to provide it.

In 1930 the American people had almost no sense of a national government. There was a post office occasionally see a soldier on the street. The national government had very little direct impact on the lives of ordinary Americans.

There were no personal danger no Social Security no unemployment insurance no nothing

on your own.

By 1931 Hard Times seemed to be everywhere. But if you could still spare a dime. You could slip into a glamorous world where the Roaring Twenties. Had never ended. If you go to the Grand Lake Theater. Here Horace height and his orchestra play for half an hour.

Then he'd have a Movietone News. And then that had the feature story. And then they would have bugs bunny or the equivalent comic and then they'd have the second feature. By that time the show was getting ready to play. Just about six or seven hours for fifteen cents there was no. Television was on radio. So this visual escape to a dark theater could literally. Forget your troubles and get happy. Many people didn't dance their troubles away. Off into the carefree irresistible rhythms of a new generation of jazz music that was sweeping the country. Sweet. Langenbrunner each. Child. Is going to. Have.

Richard Colmar as Boston Blackie animator those will make him an enemy friend to those who have no FRAPH. Many more were transfixed by the gripping dramas of radio during the Depression. Radio was the one.

And

there was a shadow.

Of.

A lights that you didn't know that they were standing on a stage reading from scripts you just thought they were doing it.

That's. What I liked most was to go into my room and turn off all the lights. I didn't want any interference and just listened to it. My father thought I was a little weird Nido was in and turn the lights on and say what's wrong with you. And I said nothing's wrong and like this is really wonderful. Great way to listen to it.

But sooner or later people had to turn the radio off. Had to leave the movie theater and when they did the depression was still there waiting.

He advanced upon the farmers of the South and Midwest and terrifying storms of dry dust. It was one of the worst droughts in American history. The land itself. Was blowing away.

It looked like a tornado covered big black clouds gushed coming across the desert. There.

It was terrible you could put a shot over your face in a handkerchief and tried to breathe through it. You speed up but.

25000 square miles of farmland became known as the dust bowl for farmers who had been suffering through their own economic crisis since the 1920s. It was the final blow. Leaving their farmhouses and barns to rot. They fled westward. For the promised land. California.

Dust weary farmers joined millions of other penniless people who were wandering the country looking for a second chance. The transportation of choice was the freight train. Riding the rails was dangerous. The trains were patrolled by vicious guards. But the price was right.

When they leave they gave you the high value. Edge to shorten the law then you better get ready tankers Bolinao.

Trouble lies of sightless fools along the way. I've taken. Sightless windows stare the empty street.

No love beckons save that which I have for a second. The anguish my solitary.

To Robert Mitchum wrote his poem in 1932 when he was just another teenager in search of salvation.

This time. There were so many people on the train. That the train crew couldn't walk the tops. I met the former banker's college professors all sorts of people riding freight trains. A lot of them didn't really have a destination they were just trying to get away from where they were.

But everywhere they got to seem just as hopeless as the place they'd left behind.

Numbers of towns that would arrest those people who paid their

There was particular concern about what were called The Wild Boys of the road. President Hoover sent undercover agents to ride the rails and assess the danger. One of them was a young law student. Named Melvin Bela. Isambard of America at that time that game fair to everyone in Washington there's something wrong with the van. It's so wrong. These people are going to want a revolution.

Strikes and protests were spreading.

Bill Wheeler was a 19 year old truck driver when he witnessed a demonstration in New York. Square. It was just filled with mobs of people they were demonstrating turned out. For unemployment. Relief. Benefits. And. The. Police and the. Firemen were mowing him down with fire hoses. Cops were beating them on the head. It is unbelievable.

Radical movements like the Communist Party were gaining influence and hundreds.

President Hoover misread the danger signals and still did nothing to ease the suffering. We are convinced. That we have overcome. Major financial. Crisis since the.

For some. The loss of faith has so profound. That they simply fled the country.

Three years after Joseph Stalin had predicted the death of capitalism. A. Hundred thousand Americans moved to the Soviet Union. To help build. Communist. Has worked for anybody that wanted to work.

Under this go around with your hat and tears in your eyes begging for a job. It seemed to be a land of great promise. At that time

this was the only time in history that more people were leaving America. Than coming to it.

In time the Great Depression spread like a virus far beyond American borders.

Signs of a different time for the family lay in Germany. The situation was becoming dangerous. In the Depression only made worse the already harsh conditions brought on by Germany's loss. World War 1. There was. There wasn't much. And because of this. Protest marches demonstrations study

unemployed people that were

shouting slogans. Give us give us.

So much.

I. Know. I know. You. Need a. Powerful Leader. Powerful man to lead us out of that.

The first time she marched around and said brownshirts

the flags.

I remember how could this mean something to the children. Them trying to sing this song.

The leader of the Nazi movement knew instinctively that Germany suffering was his opportunity. Adolf Hitler told the demoralized Germans that he could cure what ailed them.

Kathy

likes his speeches.

He started on a list of Clavier

and he talked about ordinary citizens and himself

saying something like our enemies same thing we all get sick. And I promise you I will erase all that we demand our place and the site which does allow us I need you there. I will leave you there from is it not a case in

1932 Hitler's rapidly growing Nazi Party took 37 percent of the vote in parliamentary elections though not a majority. He had called all the other parties. Hitler used his strength to seize the chancellorship of Germany and destroy opposition to his rule.

On January 30th 1933 his followers celebrated his ascension to power. With a torchlight victory parade through. Held by hard time as the Nazi era. Had begun.

Procession on us.

Martian music with the torch lights big beaming and gave us a strange light in the.

Was ingenuousness mosquitoes of

must. Magic.

To send masses such as it.

But he had charisma no doubt about that. And. Promised the people. That. Good with. People with desperate to see.

People. Being desperate. They will run after. A man. Like.

1932 was also a year of decision for the Americans.

Republican President Herbert Hoover campaigned for re-election. Only to find that everywhere he went his name had become synonymous with failure.

Shantytowns of unemployed men were now called Hoovervilles. Newspapers were Hoover blankets. Empty Pockets Hoover flags. The very first see that no man woman or child it was said in Hoover that even dogs took an instinctive dislike to him.

And in 1932 campaign one man wired him vote for Roosevelt and make a unanimous

vote for Franklin D.

New York Governor Franklin Roosevelt was the Democratic Party candidate.

He had been struck by polio in 1921. He was known more for his charm than his accomplishments.

Most people were not sure what he meant when he promised a new deal to the American people. But neither was he. But Roosevelt appeared optimistic. Confident. And he wasn't. Herbert Hoover.

That.

Roosevelt won in the greatest electoral landslide America had ever seen. And he faced perhaps the greatest challenge ever presented to an American leader.

The four million unemployed of 1930 had turned into 16 million. By 1933 25 percent of the American workforce in the American economy was in freefall.

Columnist this is a great to some extent on this but. We could have lost everything in 1933

it was that man

on inauguration day nearly a hundred thousand people braved the cold March morning to hear what the new president would do. This great nation will endure. As it has in the last year. That magnificent resonance coming out we have

nothing to fear but fear itself and everybody will look at each other and nod their head and then say my friends everybody could feel he was talking to him. I was one of his friends that was one of these people.

And me a little black boy. Down in Georgia. Hearing that voice over the radio. You know. I felt that it wasn't that he told it to bad and daddy told it to me. I told it to my mind that no he was talking to little Ossis sitting there listening to him. He could through the magic of his voice and radio reach out and involve you in the great adventure. Of building making America work again. Roosevelt moved decisively to restore confidence in the country's financial system. In one daring he closed the nation's banks and ordered the Treasury to rush them two billion dollars in currency. That may make it clear that Bank of the reaction was to his kozy the bank thank God somebody has come in and had done something. When the banks reopened deposits easily exceeded withdrawals.

Rescuing the banks was only the beginning. In his first hundred days in the White House Roosevelt moved at a breathtaking pace regulating business helping farmers pumping new money into the economy. It was the most massive intervention in the lives of the American people the country had ever known.

Roosevelt put people on the government payroll when private business didn't hire them fast enough. The wild boys of the road became part of a civilian conservation corps planting trees and building roads across America. They ship to Shafter farm at Grand Canyon. Would be trailed off. People come in and sightseeing. We got five dollars a month. Fenno said. 25 home for your family live on

this is the federal government's stepping in to help people.

May not have been enough. In some cases. It didn't help. But somebody was trying. One had that feeling. That. Maybe it was going to work.

Millions of Americans had been helped in the first year of the New Deal. But for millions more the year 1933 ended in frustration. President Roosevelt had lifted their spirits but not their circumstances. After a time the haunting thought could not be put down that maybe this great depression was never again. But with this sense of rising expectations people are stirred out of their lethargy and in 1934 there is the most radical mood of any year of the Great Depression.

President Roosevelt had contributed to that a radical mood when he became the first American president to say that Labor had a right to unionize. But businessmen remain decidedly anti union. In the spring of 1934 emboldened dockworkers closed ports along the Pacific coast. In San Francisco. Their strike turned violent.

We heard on the radio that all this terrible stuff is going on.

Down there. And. I remember my mother and I were frightened and very upset would. Put Harold make it.

Got so bad that two men were killed.

By bullets. Sensibly from the police. Nobody really ever figured that one out. Totally

Carol was right on the foreigner and one was killed.

Shocked the city. The killings then used to shock.

The funeral for the two murdered strikers to 50000 people. That funeral Solem.

It's so shocked the city it was so impressive.

That was enough to infuriate the people who have suffered so much. They said we've had it every day we're watched the launch of seamen getting beaten and clubbed. We've had a lot of eyebrows. By God whatever it takes to win this strike we're going to win it. And they stopped all work. Even Obama says we need to give back to anybody. The strike is over. Well I sympathize with the union. We sympathized with demand and so they shut the port down shut the city down. Little stores closed until our boys when

the city was quiet required

nothing for four solid

the longshoremen won virtually all their demands. Encouraging workers across the country to move against management. In 1934 there were more than 18 hundred strikes for union recognition.

Coal miners steel walk well different people packing out. They set up a bunch of starving seamen and longshoremen went to the farm. And we could do it back if we could do it we could do with.

Labor unrest was only one of Roosevelt's problems in 1934. Economic recovery had stalled and critics complained that he'd gone too far. The constitutionality of some New Deal programs were being challenged in the courts. And business leaders were warning that FDR had steered the country recklessly to the left. Roosevelt knew that his program still hadn't reached millions of desperate Americans. And he didn't know how long they would wait.

Discontent and frustration gave rise to any number of demagogues. Including the charismatic radio priest Father Charles Coughlin children and

Dr. Frances Townsend a self-proclaimed advocate for the elderly. Radical spellbinder who claimed the New Deal was dying.

During 1934. One of these would be saviors developed a national following and presidential ambitions.

He was called the Kingfish senator and former Louisiana Governor Huey Long. We told you

the best entertainment you had when he came to town to speak. Put it into play cause everybody went to hear whether they were him or against me. Was marvelous. The prayer is to use such expressive language that no one gets to 5 million people listens. Many discover they liked what they heard what Huey Long was saying was that he was going to soak the rich and he was going to give that money to the poor. His plan was never really carefully worked out and in his own state in Louisiana he fell notably short of redistributing the wealth. But it had a kind of direct appeal that the more complex programs of the New Deal lacked and also provided a focus for the animus against the rich that had been building during the years of the Great Depression.

Long promised every American to house the car radio. In return he wanted power or absolute power. You could do anything in Louisiana. She got his OK who was vicious.

If he told them no knock it down

had built up a private police force. He had shown his contempt for the democratic processes and that created a great deal of worry in Washington not just Southerners but Midwestern farmers in New York. Factory workers are rejoining long share our wealth clubs. By 1935 Franklin Roosevelt was privately calling Huey Long the most dangerous man in America. They sat up and called down here. They have food rights. You have the makings of a good.

Thinking With Election Night.

Along with rising about.

Huey Long never got the chance to run for president. He was cut down by an assassin in September 1935.

By then. President Roosevelt was hard at work on a populist agenda of his own pushing Congress to create the social security programs welfare for the poor. And jobs for 8 million people on public projects of every description. This was called the second 100 days and it reshaped American life. The legislation of the second hundred days gives an underpinning to day economy. That's not been there before. There's now a system of unemployment compensation of old age pensions. The United States for the first time has a centralized banking system. And by 1936 there are visible signs of recovery.

Six years after he lost his grocery store Miriam Johnson's father found a steady job with the Works Progress Administration. He was so happy to get up in the morning my father was so happy even though the work by this time he wasn't a kid that was picked up for work and that he was so happy to have something to do and to get paid for.

To me. The Roosevelt era revolutionized. The perception of what government owes the people and what its role was

not.

A proud history in an era in that area. I think it was the guidance that we had and we maintained that democracy that we all cherish

campaigning for a second term in 1936 Roosevelt told a cheering crowd. You look happier today than you did four years ago.

Franklin Delano Roosevelt was reelected by the greatest margin in the history of American politics.

In the four years since President Roosevelt had taken office America had experienced a revolution and it had been led by the president himself.

The New Deal programs of the Depression era transformed the country's landscape. One project alone the Tennessee Valley Authority. Built dams brought electricity in the floods and lifted families out of poverty in seven states.

But as he took office for his second term in January 1937 Roosevelt's New Deal still had not completely overcome the depression in America.

By 1937 the depression in Germany was over. Adolf Hitler had kept his promise to give the people what.

Unemployed people disappeared. Practically overnight.

When the young healthy. Man standing at the corners of Berlin and begging around for Pennine.

He fled jobs were happy. The secret of Germany's new prosperity was rearmament. There were plenty of jobs making powerful new weapons. And building a highway system as much for tanks as for cars.

Also. Knew. That. He was preparing for war. The first step came in March of 1936 when German troops marched on the poles to the right to reoccupy territory lost to France. After the first.

And I sincerely. Believed.

My father that I could stop. My mother said no. Fritz Slieve said boy can't help. And I I started again and was met with a lot of envy my pain lost and. Now of course I realize my parents rights to.

I. It's all too late.

Now Adolf Hitler would try to keep another promise to the German people. To. Build a new. German. Empire. One he said that would last a thousand years.

Depression and desperation had unleashed a force that would alter the course of the 20th century. We'll see that on the next episode of the century America's time. I'm Peter Jennings. Thank you for joining us.