By the spring of 1953 nearly 50000 Americans had returned home from the Korean War in Claassens.

People at home continue to wonder how much longer they would have to endure. This strange war being fought in a strange land.

Two brothers were serving in Korea at the same time.

I was scared to death. Because. I want my brothers to come home.

And when they came home.

It was like.

Greatest day. In.

That summer of 1953 the U.S. finally reached a truce agreement with the North Koreans and the Chinese. And the Americans tried to put another war behind and.

President Eisenhower had kept his campaign pledge to resolve the Korean conflict. Now he hoped to make America's domestic life his priority. I believe in the future of United States. He was going to take care of the state. He's going to take care of us first. It was a good thing.

The time was right.

One of the things that I most tried to do when he became president was to lower the rhetoric. And lower the sense of crisis.

His countrymen were more than ready to relax. With the war over an America bursting with energy. It was time to focus on a more promising future.

By 1953 the American people had been dealing with one crisis or another since 1929 the Great Depression World War II the Berlin blockade and then Korea. Eisenhower felt it was now time to turn back the clock to the America of his childhood a simpler country where it turned out white males had the last word and where women kept the home fires burning and the business of America was business. At first many Americans seemed happy to oblige. But as the decade wore on Eisenhower. And they would discover that not everyone was ready to return to the old way of doing things.

By late 1953 the economic boom that had arrived after the Second World War had already transformed the country.

Self-confident people for the first time since 1929. People putting money in the banks. The. Real wages were going up 4.5 percent. It's just incredible to think about.

America from the 1950s was very rapidly becoming a consumer society. People were buying. More than ever before in history. For the first time. More Americans were doing white collar work than manual labor. Advertising Marketing and Public Relations. Were now the preferred professions. Certainly the term. But I don't know what to think about public relations. He got a clean shave today every day. Today. In the shadow of the Cold War it seemed almost patriotic to be part of the American economic miracle. To be a member of a corporate team. Follow its rules. I became a salesman like man with a gray suit. I was told where to buy my clothes. It might not have been a gray flannel suit but I'd better be able to win. And there was a lot of choices of colored shirts as long as they were white. You called attention to yourself if you deviated from the norm and nobody did. Nobody did. We all look the same

people kind of like to be dressed alike and to follow the same sort of social customs you were expected to have at least two drinks at lunch preferably martinis. If anyone said I have a Perrier had been laughed at.

And when they advertised for secretaries they specified good looking. It was not a good time for women in the workplace. Starns Mr. Rath. Cites them as Lawrence. We always give a new ballot for the secretary. There were no female managers none. It wasn't even considered.

In the 1950s the woman's place was in the home. In the embrace of a loving husband by 1957 97 percent of all marriageable men and women were married and if they care to have a social life they stayed that way. It was that couples society. We did things in couples barbecue's and it's always couples if we knew that the person was divorced we might have a second thought about asking.

The thing was to be married and keep the home together

more and more of that home was on America's new Crabgrass Frontier. In an era that favored conformity. It was perhaps no surprise that by the end of the decade a quarter of the population lived in the tract homes of the modern suburbs

loafing for which was the beginning. Of a happy experience over a challenging experience.

Everything was similar. One of my friends Ruby My phone rings and she says to me while I have a problem with won't matter he said I can't find my house.

Bleak look at them from the air. But those little cookie cutter houses on the straight streets at right angles. A lot of the things are happening.

At a very fast rate.

Obstetrician's and the obstetrician's were up until 2 a.m. in the morning.

This was. The place to raise children because it.

Was here at my old home. The neighbor's home down the block at a friend's home without up without any restriction without a funny feeling that I was violating anyone's territory.

The emotional core of the night. Was all about. Stability.

Both my parents had experienced depression both my parents had experienced.

I know that they looked upon their little house in Lakewood as a refuge from many of the things that had trouble there. Their

activities were centered around the home. We had a lot of parties.

People were renters were like we came together in that way. We seem to be interested in what we were doing for the good of all of us.

It was a fabulous life.

And life was getting better for a lot of American families propelled by the powerful economy they were stepping into the middle class at a rate of more than a million a year

with extra money to spend and plenty of shiny new merchandise to choose from. People bought things whether they needed them or not. Sometimes just to match the pace of their neighbors. We had an eye on consumer goods.

Keeping up with the Joneses. When people read it give us a call on the phone that the television set was just delivered. It wouldn't be long before we be down having Sodor watching the new television and as soon as we left there we would say that's what we have to have next.

Knew television would soon become the thing that. Everyone. Had to have.

It was in the early 1950s that one of America's most intense love affairs blossomed most brightly.

On this thing in and around this block from people there. Well I won't tell you don't move for days. You sat in front of that set even when there was nothing on the test that you thought you can't tell a lie or put on something right now. Television sets were rapidly becoming affordable for the average consumer. And as they did the demand for new programming became overwhelming. That's right. Most television programs aired live with all the flaws of the live performance. Yet even with mistakes most viewers love the tube the television business was a sandbox where you could go in with almost any idea you have a chance to do it. It. Was an amazing.

Radio long the staple of family entertainment was virtually abandoned nimble talents like Milton Berle and the famous newscaster Edward R. Murrow made the transition to the new medium. It brought us news. It brought to straddlers. It had become an intricate part of our life and it wouldn't be unusual. For a four year doctor to say I'll see you at 7 o'clock on Tuesday and you would say I am very sorry. I love Lucy is on I have. To say. I'm.

By the mid 1950s only a few years after their commercial introduction television sets were in three quarters of American homes. People now spend a third of their waking hours in the glow of the box. Lured by entertainment. They became a captive audience for the sales

of these three windows ABC CBS and NBC. Were a window on a world that a family could sit down and look out. And see what they didn't have. I know what you're your to show as a Westinghouse refrigerator Westinghouse you may have everything that you did was geared at a family target audience. It was a very conservative and repressive time but it was also a time that was the beginning of change. For conformity. She did change. Hugh Hefner was 27 when he started Playboy magazine. At the time a daring challenge to the country's obscenity laws. His first Playmate of the month was a rising young starlet named Marilyn Monroe. But after that the peanut was just as likely to be. The girl next door. The girl next door notion of going off the Dark was rooted in the notion that nice girls like sex too the sex is OK and that was the 50s a very sensational interview and potentially dangerous point of view. It was risky enough so I didn't put my name on the on the first issue. Within a year Playboy was selling 100000 copies a month. And it was not the only thing threatening the status quo.

Nothing worried traditionalists more than the new kind of music being performed by singers such as Lloyd Price.

While it was really race music we had maybe two radio stations in New Orleans that played that music. It had no name. It was just music.

By 1955 the music didn't have a. Rock n Roll. And young people everywhere. When listening to.

Wisconsin native heroes he was then 15 years old. I got my own portable radio. And at night I could pick up all the Southern stations so I heard a little Richard for the first time. In my whole world changed everything changed. I would call WAPT all in Appleton Wisconsin and ask them to play a little Richard and they said the station manager. Wouldn't allow Little Richard on the radio because his was the devil's music. So I knew it was good.

It. Was a much more infectious kind of music that we'd never heard before and had an edge. There were suggestive things in it and you know it was kind of risque. The parents are saying this is going to ruin our kids. Their concern was that their daughters and even their songs was fallen in love with black people. Sam Phillips was the owner of Sun Records a southern music label. You know my answer was from day one was I truly can look you straight and tell you they are not falling in love with black or white or green or yellow. They're falling in love with the vitality of the music.

And it wasn't long before white musicians like Bill Haley and His comments were making and the charts with rock hits of their own. But the music was still waiting for its first superstar. And in 1956 he arrived.

I wasn't the soul soul shop. And John King this song and this I started singing and there was like stillness and then everybody started dancing and it's like a wave of energy came over. Please God this is wonderful. I turned around to the girl next to me and I said. What's. That. And she looked at me as if I was like from another planet. And she said just what she said.

The. Here. That I saw Elvis Presley. The electricity was so high. Had you put that much energy in what you would have collapsed. It wasn't just Elvis was white sound black. His haircut and his hips spoke to rebellious feelings in young people across America.

And the funny thing is that you scream so much you really couldn't hearing that you felt you had to scream. It's just.

Kids screaming with joy. Parents screaming Elvis name in white with his songs and his news still offended many. In July 1956 Elvis Presley's act was called vulgar and suggestive by the tremendously popular columnist and television show host Ed Sullivan. Less than two months later Sullivan booked the singer on his show

as a minister as coach in America minister should rendering the. Culture. And therefore that's a very big political moment. We cannot hold the line anymore. If I hold the line and keep all of us off. I'm going to fail. And that's a very important shit going on in Sullivan's symbol that it had happened

roll was here to stay. It had become the soundtrack for a new era of change

is Jerry Lee Lewis balls of fire.

In 1957 a television program called American Bandstand went national on the ABC network and the show's target audience quickly demonstrated its newfound power by turning Bandstand host Dick Clark into overnight icons. Every kid watched it was a story about once a police force afraid a rumble was going to have a street fight because no kids were around. They conducted a door to door search they found all the kids were watching bandstands.

I remember feeling this tremendous feeling of confirmation. That I belong to a group of people called teenagers and we have our own.

Side. You know I just I felt that I could I could express myself I could be free I could dance and I could shake around and I could have fun. There was no stopping us. The parents didn't have a chance. It looked like another way that the young were breaking away was through their use of language. The Beat movement thrived in the coffeehouses of New York's Greenwich Village Life first time on the glass. Like angry reptiles running from the head of the village has a life and language all its own. If you do get your hip if you don't. Mind your square. The flat feet where the forefathers of the 1960s counterculture. Challenging the conformity of the 50s by ridiculing mainstream values.

That was her self identity balseros said Why are you identify with her. There's

an even more significant challenge to the complacent 50s came from America's black community living in the consumer society but having few of its advantages. They chose this moment to make white America. Live up to its ideals. Amazingly fifties America had moved little beyond the days of Jim Crow particularly in the south. Life among blacks and whites remains separate and unequal. It was no way you could be black in this country and not be affected.

Here I was selling millions of records around the world. Hero everywhere and I couldn't get a hot dog in Baltimore unless I went to the back door.

It wasn't right. But that's just how it was. That was just life.

On December 1st 1955 on a public bus in Montgomery Alabama. Life began to change by refusing to give up her seat to a white man a tired seamstress named Rosa Parks. Quietly. Ignited. A revolution.

The day that Rose posthumous arrest a low murmur went through the whole city. And over night this. Thing led by a charismatic young preacher named Martin Luther King the city's black community organized a peaceful boycott of the buses. They walk instead.

In fashion nonviolent fulfilled depending the spiritual forces. White policemen responded by arresting black car drivers. White extremists bomb Kingswell.

Mark always said you know if you don't have. Anything that you die for what do you have to do.

No but I thought we could. Stay off the bus.

None of those people wanted to lose their jobs. But Martin Luther had instilled in them so right that we must all make a sacrifice. That the buses continued to run.

They did. For 381 days.

On November the 13th 1956 the Supreme Court ordered the buses desegregated Martin Luther King was now the undisputed leader of the civil rights movement. The colored population idolize Martin Luther gone back to the bunker bragging about a good people experience the self-esteem that they had never experienced before and they had been given a light a beacon at end the time

that light reached Melba Beal's a fifteen year old high school student in Little Rock Arkansas. I was very conscious of what was going on and wanting it to wash over me and wash over Little Rock. It was about 2:00 in 1954 the Supreme Court had ordered the integration of all public schools in its famous decision Brown versus the Board of Education. Three years later that decision would be severely tested. Little Rock's all white Central High School despite a federal court ordered Arkansas Governor Orval Faubus had no intention of allowing black students to attend sensitives II and he ordered the Arkansas National Guard to surround the school.

On September the 3rd Melba Beals and eight other black students walked towards Central High one Elizabeth Eckford became separated from her friends and was surrounded by a white mob that included and tops. There was just a lot of electricity in the air. It was almost a circus like atmosphere.

All these parents on the sidelines urgent a sign telling us to get out there don't let them get.

There are mobs on her heels who like dogs

policemen are watching here. She tries to step between them. They close

if Central High was to be integrated it would have to be by order of the president. Eisenhower was at first reluctant to defend his record on civil rights was not a gig until 1957 when the crisis and is there a fundamental question was dealt with. Do the states have the right to impose their own social order. In defiance of federal court orders. Eisenhower answered decisively said no. We have made a national commitment. We are going to desegregate this society and if it takes the Hunter 1st Airborne to do it so be it.

It put me that that is David. Still.

See. Little Rock just being in a state of siege by the. Troops.

That was real fear.

Three weeks after the Little Rock Nine were turned away from Central High. They returned accompanied by troops of the hundred and first airborne.

Were all in an army station wagon machine gun mounts. It's pretty heady day. It's not what everybody gets to go to school.

Paratroopers have helicopter. Jeeps in front line. And we stepped out of the jeep into this square of soldiers who were serious

you know as I walked up the steps that day at Central High School. I can remember click up the leather boots.

And I remember being so impressed by who they were. And these are Americans. I'm an American. And so the first time I get the feeling that there is hope. That there is a reason. I salute the flag. This is what America is about.

That will never be the same again. We were never no life. We now need tweaking. Because nine

people walked into a school building

my teenage models had been the kids who danced on American Bandstand and all of a sudden in come the Little Rock Nine

and I can remember having the feeling that they've been tied and tried and tested and they've survived some day in some way. I'm going to be tested this way too.

So I think when the movement comes along in 1960s I'm ready for.

Finally late 1950s driven by the powerful economy the American people's long running fascination with automobiles was changing the very fabric of the country. The car came to be the dominant symbol of American life and had an impact on American life. It is difficult to argue that.

Americans are now confronted with a dazzling array of choices on the showroom floors. So many that for the first time. People began to view cars the same way that they once viewed clothes for hairdos as an emblem of their personality.

For Funderburk.

Even the name had a ring to it.

A yellow. Station wagon. A station wagon provides room in the back to carry the lawn more that's broken.

My boyfriend. Drove chevre light. Up. That's the prettiest car I've ever seen in my life. I felt like a cool car.

General Motors had a budget the size of Poland's nationwide every seventh job was related to the automobile industry. The term dry then became a part of the language. There was a national hotel chain created entirely for road travelers and a restaurant that spoke exclusively to a newly mobile country.

But the most profound effect of the car on American life the one that actually altered the landscape. Was the immense new federal highway system begun in 1956 the largest public works project in history. Forever connected American motorists from city to city from coast to coast.

Those maps. Would show you. Proposed interstate highway. Interstate highway under construction and then the payoff. Completed it hoping to. Get on those. The. Amazon.

Just open up.

What most Americans did not realize was with the freeways had been built with an ulterior motive. The Overpasses freedom loving motorist for driving under were built 15 feet high in order to allow the easy movement of missile systems.

President Eisenhower approved the project in part because he wanted military traffic to be able to move easily in the event of a national crisis

in the frivolous 1950s people lived under the ever darkening shadow of the Cold War. The U.S. said the Soviet Union each now had massive arsenals at their disposal. The Cold War struggle seemed to be everywhere. In Hungary. When people rebelled against the Russian occupation in 1956. They believed America would intervene on their behalf.

This was very difficult for the United States after all we've been saying the liberation of Hungary is important to the free world and so forth. But what are we going to do about it.

The Russians put it in there was so much in the way of tanks and troops this would've been a major war.

It's just hard at the height of the crisis with the Russian tanks on the street below these kids in Hungary who had control of the radio station and they were broadcasting S.O.s S.O.S. The tanks are here we need help. You promised to help us where is our help. And it was no answer.

Maybe 10000 Hungarians died at the altar of the superpower competition. The competition that was taking on apocalyptic overtones.

It had taken the Soviets for years to duplicate the American success with the atomic bomb it took only eight months for them to do the same with a hydrogen bomb.

There was no doubt that everybody was grilling him as fast as I could.

We've got to build

we've got to improve them and keep.

The need to test the new weapons was seen as so urgent that the U.S. government even put its own troops in harm's way.

Within a few months of the successful Soviet hydrogen test in 1953. Several thousand American troops were ordered into trenches of the Arizona desert. One of them was a Korean War veteran reason. Wareheim. The purpose was to test the reaction of the troops.

To an atomic bomb.

That shot went off. This is like with your hands over your eyes she said.

And it just got off just.

A few minutes later back in.

The house it was in front of us. No it was gone.

It was two thousand five hundred eighty four men. That were there. There was only three of us still alive.

How many Americans were affected altogether it could never be fully determined. The fallout from this explosion known as Shatz Simon reached as far away as New Jersey among the dirtiest of the 200 aboveground nuclear tests that took place between 1954 and 1958.

The same frenzied pace of experimentation was applied to the Rathod program. Both superpowers saw them as crucial for the delivery of powerful nuclear payloads American scientists were not always having much luck.

They saw the rockets that were pointed north go south. And those that were pointed south go north.

They saw straight up in here and exploded.

I saw one go straight up incomes dropped back down to.

Never during those 100 launches. I see anything like.

On October 4th 1957. Someone did get it right.

Say attention all radio stations all the Soviet Union are broadcasting

satellite.

Beep beep beep beep. What is it. Sputnik Sputnik is around. There.

It's.

First.

I can remember going out. To my backyard. Thinking. That this. Great streak across the sky. And I filled a. Certain sinking feeling of almost terror.

Now suddenly. You got Soviet missiles that can leak. Into the Dakotas can hit Chicago with a surprise attack possible for the first time Americans began to look at the sky differently. Now as a place from which terror might break.

And to learn some new terms like duck and. Cover.

I felt. That the threat to America had been had been increased that the. Soviet Union had upped the ante.

While we were playing cops and robbers Hide and Seek. In our backyards in our front yard. There was the gnawing anxiety that. It could all end instantaneously.

July 25 1950 a U.S. exhibition in Moscow Soviet Premier Khrushchev and American Vice President Nixon discussed the relative merits of communism and capitalism. There are some instances where you may be ahead of us for example in the development of your trust of your rockets. Them was built from the same material. They were daft and they want to show each other that their societies. But there may be some instances for example color television where were you. It became known as the Kitchen Debate seemed to demonstrate America's new insecurity in the world.

Sputnik had been a technological Pearl Harbor began a tremendous sense of self appraisal. Are we falling behind the Russians. What are we teaching our children. I remember Life magazine doing a whole spread on contrasting a Soviet and American high school and Little Havana. And Ivan studied rocket physics and Jim and Sue were both in the high school gym and the clear message for this was you know that in 10 15 years we would be a client state of the Soviet Union because we were wasting our lives dancing way and invading while these people were working 20 hour days.

Suddenly an American embrace of intellectuals as it was being seen on campuses in libraries.

And on television shows starting with 21 when I can remember Charles Van Doren was a contestant. He was the son of a celebrated professor right. He performed so brilliantly that he became a national celebrity. How May Day received hundreds of letters telling him he was America's fault for a more cerebral future. It was a false start

in November 1959 Van Doren testified that he had been given answers to the questions he'd been asked the show's producers had stage managed to contest in an effort to win ratings.

There was

nothing like

the man

you believed people who believed people when they told you something except it Stice billion a year on the line.

The medium had exposed its ugly side for all to witness in the decade to come. Americans would discover that television was not the only beloved institution that wasn't quite what it seemed

as the 50s gave way to the sixties a new generation became a force in popular culture and in politics that's on the next episode of the century. America's time. I'm Peter Jennings. We hope you'll join us.